Coronavirus Self-Checker is a tool to help you make decisions on when to seek testing and appropriate medical care.
People with COVID-19 symptoms reported – ranging from mild symptoms to severe illness.
Symptoms may appear 2-14 days after exposure to the virus.
People with these symptoms may have COVID-19:
The most common symptoms of COVID-19 are fever, dry cough, and tiredness. Other symptoms that are less common and may affect some patients include aches and pains, nasal congestion, headache, conjunctivitis, sore throat, diarrhea, loss of taste or smell or a rash on skin or discoloration of fingers or toes. These symptoms are usually mild and begin gradually. Some people become infected but only have very mild symptoms.
This list does not include all possible symptoms.
CDC will continue to update this list as we learn more about COVID-19.
Look for emergency warning signs* for COVID-19.
If someone is showing any of these signs, seek emergency medical care immediately:
*This list is not all possible symptoms.
Please call your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 or call ahead to your local emergency facility: Notify the operator that you are seeking care for someone who has or may have COVID-19.
Influenza (Flu) and COVID-19 are both contagious respiratory illnesses, but they are caused by different viruses.
COVID-19 is caused by infection with a new coronavirus (called SARS-CoV-2) and flu is caused by infection with influenza viruses.
Because some of the symptoms of flu and COVID-19 are similar, it may be hard to tell the difference between them based on symptoms alone, and testing may be needed to help confirm a diagnosis.
Flu and COVID-19 share many characteristics, but there are some key differences between the two.
While more is learned every day, there is still a lot that is unknown about COVID-19 and the virus that causes it.
This page compares COVID-19 and flu, given the best available information to date.
Find out who should get tested.
Protect yourself and others.
Wear a mask, wash hands often, stay 6 ft from others.
Two kinds of tests are available for COVID-19: viral tests and antibody tests.
A guide to help you make decisions on when to seek testing and appropriate medical care.
Not everyone needs to be tested.
If you do get tested, you should self-quarantine/isolate at home pending test results and follow the advice of your health care provider or a public health professional.
Protect Yourself and Others
You can take steps to slow the spread of COVID-19.
Learn more
How Coronavirus Spreads
How to Protect Yourself
Cleaning and Disinfecting Your Home
Living in Close Quarters
 Living in Shared Housing
COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly through close contact from person-to-person.
Some people without symptoms may be able to spread the virus.
We are still learning about how the virus spreads and the severity of illness it causes.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person.
How easily a virus spreads from person-to-person can vary.
Some viruses are highly contagious, like measles, while other viruses do not spread as easily.
Another factor is whether the spread is sustained, which means it goes from person-to-person without stopping.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is spreading very easily and sustainably between people.
Information from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic suggests that this virus is spreading more efficiently than influenza, but not as efficiently as measles, which is highly contagious.
In general, the more closely a person interacts with others and the longer that interaction, the higher the risk of COVID-19 spread.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
This is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads, but we are still learning more about how this virus spreads.
The best way to prevent illness is to avoid being exposed to this virus.
You can take steps to slow the spread.
Learn more about what you can do to protect yourself and others.
ASL Video Series: How does COVID-19 Spread?
Older adults and people who have certain underlying conditions like heart or lung disease or diabetes are at increased risk of severe illness from COVID-19 illness.
More information on Are you at higher risk for serious illness.
CDC Director Robert R. Redfield, MD discusses how we can slow the spread of COVID-19.​​
Help stop the spread of COVID-19 and other respiratory illnesses by following these steps.
View handwashing video in Spanish
View handwashing video in French
Everyday Steps and Extra Steps When Someone Is Sick
Wearing gloves outside of these instances (for example, when using a shopping cart or using an ATM) will not necessarily protect you from getting COVID-19 and may still lead to the spread of germs.
The best way to protect yourself from germs when running errands and after going out is to regularly wash your hands with soap and water for 20 seconds or use hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Always read and follow the directions on the label to ensure safe and effective use.
You should never eat, drink, breathe or inject these products into your body or apply directly to your skin as they can cause serious harm.
Do not wipe or bathe pets with these products or any other products that are not approved for animal use.
See EPAs 6 steps for Safe and Effective Disinfectant Useexternal icon
Special considerations should be made for people with asthma and they should not be present when cleaning and disinfecting is happening as this can trigger asthma exacerbations.
Learn more about reducing asthma triggers.
Wear gloves and make sure you have good ventilation when using the disinfectant
For carpet, clean and disinfect affected area, vacuum as usual
For soft surfaces such as carpeted floor, rugs, and drapes.
Launder items (if possible) according to the manufacturers instructions.
Use the warmest appropriate water setting and dry items completely.
Follow manufacturers instruction for cleaning electronics
For electronics, such as tablets, touch screens, keyboards, and remote controls.
For clothing, towels, linens and other items.
Wash your hands often with soap and water for 20 seconds
Always read and follow the directions on the label to ensure safe and effective use.
See FDAs Tips for Safe Sanitizer Useexternal icon and CDC's Hand Sanitizer Use Considerations
Ventilation and filtration provided by heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning (HVAC) systems can reduce the airborne concentration of the virus that causes COVID-19 (SARS-CoV-2), which can reduce the risk of transmission through the air.
Keep a separate bedroom and bathroom for a person who is sick
Keep separate bedroom and bathroom for a person who is sick (if possible).
Use disposable gloves when handling and disposing of trash
More details: Complete Disinfection Guidance
Interim Recommendations for U.S.
Households with Suspected or Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)
Revisions were made on 3/26/2020 to reflect the following:
There is much to learn about the novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) that causes coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Based on what is currently known about COVID-19, spread from person-to-person of this virus happens most frequently among close contacts (within about 6 feet).
This type of transmission occurs via respiratory droplets.
On the other hand, transmission of novel coronavirus to persons from surfaces contaminated with the virus has not been documented.
Recent studies indicate that people who are infected but do not have symptoms likely also play a role in the spread of COVID-19.
Transmission of coronavirus occurs much more commonly through respiratory droplets than through objects and surfaces, like doorknobs, countertops, keyboards, toys, etc.
Current evidence suggests that SARS-CoV-2 may remain viable for hours to days on surfaces made from a variety of materials.
Cleaning of visibly dirty surfaces followed by disinfection is a best practice measure for prevention of COVID-19 and other viral respiratory illnesses in households and community settings.
It is unknown how long the air inside a room occupied by someone with confirmed COVID-19 remains potentially infectious.
Facilities will need to consider factors such as the size of the room and the ventilation system design (including flowrate air changes per hour and location of supply and exhaust vents) when deciding how long to close off rooms or areas used by ill persons before beginning disinfection.
Taking measures to improve ventilation in an area or room where someone was ill or suspected to be ill with COVID-19 will help shorten the time it takes respiratory droplets to be removed from the air.
This guidance provides recommendations on the cleaning and disinfection of households where persons under investigation (PUI) or those with confirmed COVID-19 reside or may be in self- isolation.
It is aimed at limiting the survival of the virus in the environments.
These recommendations will be updated if additional information becomes available.
These guidelines are focused on household settings and are meant for the general public.
Always read and follow the directions on the label to ensure safe and effective use.
You should never eat, drink, breathe or inject these products into your body or apply directly to your skin as they can cause serious harm.
Do not wipe or bathe pets with these products or any other products that are not approved for animal use.
See EPAs 6 steps for Safe and Effective Disinfectant Useexternal icon
Special considerations should be made for people with asthma and they should not be present when cleaning and disinfecting is happening as this can trigger asthma exacerbations.
To learn more about reducing asthma triggers: https://www.cdc.gov/asthma/reduce_triggers.html
Always read and follow the directions on the label to ensure safe and effective use.
See FDAs Tips for Safe Sanitizer Useexternal icon and CDCs Hand Sanitizer Use Considerations
Keep a Safe Distance to Slow the Spread.
Limiting close face-to-face contact with others is the best way to reduce the spread of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Social distancing, also called physical distancing, means keeping a safe space between yourself and other people who are not from your household.
To practice social or physical distancing, stay at least 6 feet (about 2 arms length) from other people who are not from your household in both indoor and outdoor spaces.
Social distancing should be practiced in combination with other everyday preventive actions to reduce the spread of COVID-19, including wearing masks, avoiding touching your face with unwashed hands, and frequently washing your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds.
COVID-19 spreads mainly among people who are in close contact (within about 6 feet) for a prolonged period.
Spread happens when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks, and droplets from their mouth or nose are launched into the air and land in the mouths or noses of people nearby.
The droplets can also be inhaled into the lungs.
Recent studies indicate that people who are infected but do not have symptoms likely also play a role in the spread of COVID-19.
Since people can spread the virus before they know they are sick, it is important to stay at least 6 feet away from others when possible, even if you—or they—do not have any symptoms.
Social distancing is especially important for people who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
If you are sick with COVID-19, have symptoms consistent with COVID-19, or have been in close contact with someone who has COVID-19, it is important to stay home and away from other people until it is safe to be around others.
COVID-19 can live for hours or days on a surface, depending on factors such as sunlight, humidity, and the type of surface.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Social distancing helps limit opportunities to come in contact with contaminated surfaces and infected people outside the home.
Although the risk of severe illness may be different for everyone, anyone can get and spread COVID-19.
Everyone has a role to play in slowing the spread and protecting themselves, their family, and their community.
In addition to practicing everyday steps to prevent COVID-19, keeping space between you and others is one of the best tools we have to avoid being exposed to this virus and slowing its spread in communities.
When going out in public, it is important to stay at least 6 feet away from other people and wear a mask to slow the spread of COVID-19.
Consider the following tips for practicing social distancing when you decide to go out.
Many people have personal circumstances or situations that present challenges with practicing social distancing to prevent the spread of COVID-19.
Please see the following guidance for additional recommendations and considerations:
Get your household ready for COVID-19.
As a family, you can plan and make decisions now that will protect you and your family.
If you have a fever, cough or other symptoms, you might have COVID-19.
Most people have mild illness and are able to recover at home.
If you think you may have been exposed to COVID-19, contact your healthcare provider.
How to Protect Those That Are Most Vulnerable
This guidance is intended for people living together in close quarters, such as people who share a small apartment, or for people who live in the same household with large or extended families.
People of any age who have certain underlying medical conditions are at risk for getting COVID-19.
Some groups have an increased risk for severe illness from coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
The following information is aimed to help you protect those who are most vulnerable in your household.
If your household includes one or more vulnerable individuals then all family members should act as if they, themselves, are at higher risk.
Learn how to protect yourself and others.
Family members should leave only when absolutely necessary.
Essential errands include going to the grocery store, pharmacy, or medical appointments that cannot be delayed (e.g infants or individuals with serious health conditions in need of aid).
If you must leave the house, please do the following:
Those who are at increased risk for severe illness should avoid caring for the children in their household, if possible.
If people at higher risk must care for the children in their household, the children in their care should not have contact with individuals outside the household.
Members of the household who are at high risk should also avoid taking care of sick people of any age who are sick.
Provide a separate bedroom and bathroom for the person who is sick, if possible.
If you cannot provide a separate room and bathroom, try to separate them from other household members as much as possible.
Keep people at higher risk separated from anyone who is sick.
Grocery Shopping, Take-Out, Banking, and Getting Gas
Order online or use curbside pickup
Shopping at farmers markets or open-air markets
If you are shopping at farmers markets or open-air markets, follow the general principles listed under Grocery Shopping, plus the following:
Limit in person contact if possible

Wash your hands or use hand sanitizer after accepting deliveries or collecting mail
Use disinfecting wipes on handles or buttons
The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic may be stressful for people.
Fear and anxiety about a new disease and what could happen can be overwhelming and cause strong emotions in adults and children.
Public health actions, such as social distancing, can make people feel isolated and lonely and can increase stress and anxiety.
However, these actions are necessary to reduce the spread of COVID-19.
Coping with stress in a healthy way will make you, the people you care about, and your community stronger.
Stress during an infectious disease outbreak can sometimes cause the following:
You may experience increased stress during this pandemic.
Fear and anxiety can be overwhelming and cause strong emotions.
Get immediate help in a crisis
Find a health care provider or treatment for substance use disorder and mental health
How you respond to stress during the COVID-19 pandemic can depend on your background, your social support from family or friends, your financial situation, your health and emotional background, the community you live in, and many other factors.
The changes that can happen because of the COVID-19 pandemic and the ways we try to contain the spread of the virus can affect anyone.
People who may respond more strongly to the stress of a crisis include:
Taking care of your friends and your family can be a stress reliever, but it should be balanced with care for yourself.
Helping others cope with their stress, such as by providing social support, can also make your community stronger.
During times of increased social distancing, people can still maintain social connections and care for their mental health.
Phone calls or video chats can help you and your loved ones feel socially connected, less lonely, or isolated.
Knowing the facts about COVID-19 and stopping the spread of rumors can help reduce stress and stigma.
Understanding the risk to yourself and people you care about can help you connect with others and make an outbreak less stressful.
Mental health is an important part of overall health and wellbeing.
It affects how we think, feel, and act.
It may also affect how we handle stress, relate to others, and make choices during an emergency.
People with pre-existing mental health conditions or substance use disorders may be particularly vulnerable in an emergency.
Mental health conditions (such as depression, anxiety, bipolar disorder, or schizophrenia) affect a persons thinking, feeling, mood or behavior in a way that influences their ability to relate to others and function each day.
These conditions may be situational (short-term) or long-lasting (chronic).
People with preexisting mental health conditions should continue with their treatment and be aware of new or worsening symptoms.
If you think you have new or worse symptoms, call your healthcare provider.
Call your healthcare provider if stress gets in the way of your daily activities for several days in a row.
Free and confidential resources can also help you or a loved one connect with a skilled, trained counselor in your area.
Get immediate help in a crisis
Find a health care provider or treatment for substance use disorder and mental health
Different life experiences affect a persons risk for suicide.
For example, suicide risk is higher among people who have experienced violence, including child abuse, bullying, or sexual violence.
Feelings of isolation, depression, anxiety, and other emotional or financial stresses are known to raise the risk for suicide.
People may be more likely to experience these feelings during a crisis like a pandemic.
However, there are ways to protect against suicidal thoughts and behaviors.
For example, support from family and community, or feeling connected, and having access to in-person or virtual counseling or therapy can help with suicidal thoughts and behavior, particularly during a crisis like the COVID-19 pandemic.
Learn more about CDCs work in suicide prevention.
It can be stressful to be separated from others if you have or were exposed to COVID-19.
Each person ending a period of home isolation may feel differently about it.
Children may also feel upset or have other strong emotions if they, or someone they know, has COVID-19, even if they are now better and able to be around others again.
For People at Higher Risk for Serious Illness
For Healthcare Workers and First Responders
Stigma is discrimination against an identifiable group of people, a place, or a nation.
Stigma is associated with a lack of knowledge about how COVID-19 spreads, a need to blame someone, fears about disease and death, and gossip that spreads rumors and myths.
No single person or group of people are more likely than others to spread COVID-19.
Public health emergencies, such as this pandemic, are stressful times for people and communities.
Fear and anxiety about a disease can lead to social stigma, which is negative attitudes and beliefs toward people, places, or things.
Stigma can lead to labeling, stereotyping, discriminationexternal icon, and other negative behaviors toward others.
For example, stigma and discrimination can occur when people link a disease, such as COVID-19, with a population, community, or nationality.
Stigma can also happen after a person has recovered from COVID-19 or been released from home isolation or quarantine.
Some groups of people who may experience stigma during the COVID-19 pandemic include:
Stigma hurts everyone by creating more fear or anger toward ordinary people instead of focusing on the disease that is causing the problem.
Stigma can also make people more likely to hide symptoms or illness, keep them from seeking health care immediately, and prevent individuals from adopting healthy behaviors.
This means that stigma can make it more difficult to control the spread of an outbreak.
Groups who experience stigma may also experience discrimination.
This discrimination can take the form of:
Stigma can negatively affect the emotional, mental, and physical health of stigmatized groups and the communities they live in.
Stigmatized individuals may experience isolation, depression, anxiety, or public embarrassment.
Stopping stigma is important to making all communities and community members safer and healthier.
Everyone can help stop stigma related to COVID-19 by knowing the facts and sharing them with others in their communities.
Community leaders and public health officials can help prevent stigma by:
Fear and anxiety about COVID-19 can cause people to avoid or reject others even though they are not at risk for spreading the virus.
Some people may have an increased risk for more serious complications from COVID-19 and should take measures to protect themselves.
For up-to-date information, visit CDCs coronavirus disease situation summary page.
More details: Stress and Coping
Based on available evidence, most children do not appear to be at higher risk for COVID-19 than adults.
While some children and infants have been sick with COVID-19, adults make up most of the known cases to date.
COVID-19 can look different in different people.
For many people, being sick with COVID-19 would be a little bit like having the flu.
People can get a fever, cough, or have a hard time taking deep breaths.
Most people who have gotten COVID-19 have not gotten very sick.
Only a small group of people who get it have had more serious problems.
CDC and partners are investigating cases of multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) associated with COVID-19.
Learn more about COVID-19 and multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C).
Check with your school on plans to continue meal services during the school dismissal.
Many schools are keeping school facilities open to allow families to pick up meals or are providing grab-and-go meals at a central location.
Not all children and teens respond to stress in the same way.
Some common changes to watch for include:
Messages for parents, school staff, and others working with children
CDC has created recommendations to help adults have conversations with children about COVID-19 and ways they can avoid getting and spreading the disease.
Children may worry about themselves, their family, and friends getting ill with COVID-19.
Parents, family members, school staff, and other trusted adults can play an important role in helping children make sense of what they hear in a way that is honest, accurate, and minimizes anxiety or fear.
Try to keep information simple and remind them that health and school officials are working hard to keep everyone safe and healthy.
You can practice healthy habits at home, school, and play to help protect against the spread of COVID-19.
If you suspect your child may have COVID-19, call the healthcare facility to let them know before you bring your child in to see them.
1 Developed by the National Association of School Nurses and the National Association of School Psychologists.
Also available in Spanish pdf iconPDF – 5 pagesexternal icon
A novel coronavirus is a new coronavirus that has not been previously identified.
The virus causing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), is not the same as the coronaviruses that commonly circulate among humans and cause mild illness, like the common cold.
On February 11, 2020 the World Health Organization announced an official name for the disease that is causing the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak, first identified in Wuhan China.
The new name of this disease is coronavirus disease 2019, abbreviated as COVID-19.
In COVID-19, ‘CO stands for ‘corona, ‘VI for ‘virus, and ‘D for disease.
Formerly, this disease was referred to as 2019 novel coronavirus or 2019-nCoV.
There are many types of human coronaviruses including some that commonly cause mild upper-respiratory tract illnesses.
COVID-19 is a new disease, caused by a novel (or new) coronavirus that has not previously been seen in humans.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person to person, mainly through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
Spread is more likely when people are in close contact with one another (within about 6 feet).
COVID-19 seems to be spreading easily and sustainably in the community (community spread) in many affected geographic areas.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
It is not yet known whether weather and temperature affect the spread of COVID-19.
Some other viruses, like those that cause the common cold and flu, spread more during cold weather months but that does not mean it is impossible to become sick with these viruses during other months.
There is much more to learn about the transmissibility, severity, and other features associated with COVID-19 and investigations are ongoing.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Each health department determines community spread differently based on local conditions.
For information on community spread in your area, please visit your health departments website.​
At this time, CDC has no data to suggest that this new coronavirus or other similar coronaviruses are spread by mosquitoes or ticks.
The main way that COVID-19 spreads is from person to person.
See How Coronavirus Spreads for more information.
Visit the How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others page to learn about how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19.
Wear masks in public settings when around people not living in your household and particularly where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, such as grocery stores, pharmacies, and gas stations.
Masks may slow the spread of the virus and help people who may have the virus and do not know it from transmitting it to others.
COVID-19 can be spread by people who do not have symptoms and do not know that they are infected.
Thats why its important for everyone to practice social distancing (staying at least 6 feet away from other people) and wear masks in public settings.
Masks provide an extra layer to help prevent the respiratory droplets from traveling in the air and onto other people.
The masks recommended are not surgical masks or N-95 respirators.
Those are critical supplies that must continue to be reserved for healthcare workers and other medical first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
More information about masks can be found on our masks site.
For more information, see Groups at Higher Risk for Severe Illness.
There is still a lot that is unknown about COVID-19 and how it spreads.
Coronaviruses are thought to be spread most often by respiratory droplets.
Although the virus can survive for a short period on some surfaces, it is unlikely to be spread from domestic or international mail, products or packaging.
However, it may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Learn more about safe handling of deliveries and mail.
In healthcare settings across the United States, donated blood is a lifesaving, essential part of caring for patients.
The need for donated blood is constant, and blood centers are open and in urgent need of donations.
CDC encourages people who are well to continue to donate blood if they are able, even if they are practicing social distancing because of COVID-19.
CDC is supporting blood centers by providing recommendations that will keep donors and staff safe.
Examples of these recommendations include spacing donor chairs 6 feet apart, thoroughly adhering to environmental cleaning practices, and encouraging donors to make donation appointments ahead of time.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Handwashing is one of the best ways to protect yourself and your family from getting sick.
Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing; going to the bathroom; and before eating or preparing food.
If soap and water are not readily available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces such as tables, doorknobs, light switches, countertops, handles, desks, phones, keyboards, toilets, faucets, and sinks.
If surfaces are dirty, clean them using detergent or soap and water prior to disinfection.
To disinfect, most common EPA-registered household disinfectants will work.
See CDCs recommendations for household cleaning and disinfection.
Most people who get COVID-19 will be able to recover at home.
CDC has directions for people who are recovering at home and their caregivers, including:
However, some people may need emergency medical attention.
Watch for symptoms and learn when to seek emergency medical attention.
When to Seek Emergency Medical Attention
Look for emergency warning signs* for COVID-19.
If someone is showing any of these signs, seek emergency medical care immediately
*This list is not all possible symptoms.
Please call your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 or call ahead to your local emergency facility: Notify the operator that you are seeking care for someone who has or may have COVID-19.
Based on available evidence, children do not appear to be at higher risk for COVID-19 than adults.
While some children and infants have been sick with COVID-19, adults make up most of the known cases to date.
However, a few children have developed multisystem inflammatory syndrome (MIS-C).
Currently, information about this syndrome is limited.
CDC is working with state and local health departments to learn more about MIS-C.
You can encourage your child to help stop the spread of COVID-19 by teaching them to do the same things everyone should do to stay healthy.
You can find additional information on preventing COVID-19 at How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others.
More information on Keeping Children Healthy during the COVID-19 Outbreak is available online.
No.
The symptoms of COVID-19 are similar in children and adults.
COVID-19 can look different in different people.
For many people, being sick with COVID-19 would be a little bit like having the flu.
People can get a fever, cough, or have a hard time taking deep breaths.
Most people who have gotten COVID-19 have not gotten very sick.
Only a small group of people who get it have had more serious problems.
CDC and partners are investigating cases of multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) associated with COVID-19.
Learn more about COVID-19 and multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C).
CDC recommends that everyone 2 years and older wear a mask that covers their nose and mouth in public settings when around people not living in your household, particularly where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain.
Masks should NOT be put on babies or children younger than 2 because of the danger of suffocation.
Children younger than 2 years of age are listed as an exception as well as anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Outbreaks can be stressful for adults and children.
When you talk with your child, try to stay calm, and reassure them that they are safe.
Talk to your children about COVID-19 and help them cope with stress.
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) is a condition where different body parts can become inflamed, including the heart, lungs, kidneys, brain, skin, eyes, or gastrointestinal organs.
We do not yet know what causes MIS-C.
However, we know that many children with MIS-C had the virus that causes COVID-19, or had been around someone with COVID-19.
MIS-C can be serious, even deadly, but most children who were diagnosed with this condition have gotten better with medical care.
Contact your childs doctor, nurse, or clinic right away if your child is showing symptoms of MIS-C. Seek emergency care right away if your child is showing any of these emergency warning signs of MIS-C or other concerning signs.
The key to slowing the spread of COVID-19 is to practice social distancing.
While school is out, children should not have in-person playdates with children from other households.
If children are playing outside their own homes, it is essential that they remain 6 feet from anyone who is not in their own household.
Some children with certain underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Make sure children practice everyday preventive behaviors, such as washing their hands often with soap and water.
Remember, if children meet outside of school in groups, it can put everyone at risk.
For more information, see Help Stop the Spread of COVID-19 in Children.
For more information, see Help Children Learn at Home.
Check with your school on plans to continue meal services during the school dismissal.
Many schools are keeping school facilities open to allow families to pick up meals or are providing grab-and-go meals at a central location.
For more information, see Keep Children Healthy during the COVID-19 Outbreak.
Older adults and people who have serious underlying medical conditions are at highest risk of getting sick from COVID-19.
Its not known yet whether all children with underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Although most COVID-19 cases in children are not severe, serious illness that needs to be treated at the hospital still happens.
Some data on children reported that the majority who needed hospitalization for COVID-19 had at least one underlying medical condition.
The most common underlying conditions reported among children with COVID-19 include chronic lung disease (including asthma), heart disease, and conditions that weaken the immune system.
This information suggests that children with these underlying medical conditions may be at risk for more severe illness from COVID-19.
More data are needed to learn which underlying or complex medical conditions may put children at increased risk.
CDC is monitoring new information as it becomes available and will provide updates as needed.
Learn more about caring for children with special health care needs during a disaster and people who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
In addition to following the recommendations to prevent getting sick and running essential errands, families should take extra steps recommended for persons with higher risk of severe COVID-19 illness and steps outlined for those with potential COVID-19 exposure or confirmed illness.
Helping children understand and follow recommendations, like social distancing and wearing masks, can be challenging if your child has intellectual disabilities, sensory issues, or other special healthcare needs.
Supporting children with special healthcare needs can put additional demands and stress on families, especially during emergency situations.
You have likely found ways to manage the stress and challenges unique to your familys situation.
It is important to continue your familys coping methods, including reaching out to other family members, friends, support groups, and organizations that have been helpful in the past.
See information on helping children cope and coping with stress (such as visiting parks, trails, or open spaces) and making your family stronger.
If you, or someone you care about, are feeling overwhelmed with emotions like sadness, depression, or anxiety, or feel like you want to harm yourself or others:
If your child with special healthcare needs becomes sick with symptoms of COVID-19, contact your childs healthcare provider.
If your child has new or worsening emergency warning signs, such as trouble breathing, pain or pressure in the chest, confusion or inability to wake them up, or bluish lips or face, call 911.
If you think your child may have COVID-19, notify the operator so that first responders may be appropriately prepared to protect themselves and others.
Notify your childs healthcare provider if someone else in your house becomes sick with COVID-19, so they can provide any advice specific for your child.
See additional information if someone in the home is sick with COVID-19 or suspected of having COVID-19.
If your childs healthcare provider tells you to go to the hospital for any health problem, including COVID-19
Create a household plan of action to help protect your health and the health of those you care about in the event of an outbreak of COVID-19 in your community:
Plan for potential changes at your workplace.
Talk to your employer about their emergency operations plan, including sick-leave policies and telework options.
Learn how businesses and employers can plan for and respond to COVID-19.
CDC does not encourage the production and use of homemade hand sanitizer products because of concerns over the correct use of the ingredientsexternal icon and the need to work under sterile conditions to make the product.
Local industries that are looking into producing hand sanitizer to fill in for commercial shortages can refer to the World Health Organization guidance.pdf iconexternal icon Organizations should revert to the use of commercially produced, FDA-approved product once such supplies again become available.
People with COVID-19 have reported a wide range of symptoms – from mild symptoms to severe illness.
Symptoms may appear 2-14 days after exposure to the virus.
If you have fever, cough, or other symptoms, you might have COVID-19.
Look for emergency warning signs* for COVID-19.
If someone is showing any of these signs, seek emergency medical care immediately
*This list is not all possible symptoms.
Please call your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 or call ahead to your local emergency facility: Notify the operator that you are seeking care for someone who has or may have COVID-19.
Yes.
It is possible to test positive for flu (as well as other respiratory infections) and COVID-19 at the same time.
Maybe; not everyone needs to be tested for COVID-19.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and want to get tested, call your healthcare provider first.
Most people will have mild illness and can recover at home without medical care and may not need to be tested.
CDC has guidance for who should be tested, but decisions about testing are made by state and local health departments and healthcare providers.
You can also visit your state or local health departments website to look for the latest local information on testing.
Decisions about testing are made by state and localexternal icon health departments or healthcare providers.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and are not tested, it is important to stay home.
What to do if you are sick.
COVID-19 testing differs by location.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and want to get tested, call your healthcare provider first.
You can also visit your state or localexternal icon health departments website to look for the latest local information on testing.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized viral tests that let you collect either a nasal swabexternal icon or a saliva sampleexternal icon at home.
However, you will still need to send your sample to a laboratory for analysis.
If you test positive for COVID-19, know what protective steps to take if you are sick or caring for someone.
If you test negative for COVID-19, you probably were not infected at the time your sample was collected.
However, that does not mean you will not get sick.
The test result only means that you did not have COVID-19 at the time of testing.
You might test negative if the sample was collected early in your infection and test positive later during your illness.
You could also be exposed to COVID-19 after the test and get infected then.
This means you could still spread the virus.
If you develop symptoms later, you might need another test to determine if you are infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.
For more information about viral tests, please visit Test for Current Infection.
Antibody tests for COVID-19 are available through healthcare providers and laboratories.
Check with your healthcare provider to see if they offer antibody tests and whether you should get one.
A positive test result shows you might have antibodies from an infection with the virus that causes COVID-19.
However, there is a chance a positive result means that you have antibodies from an infection with a virus from the same family of viruses (called coronaviruses), such as the one that causes the common cold.
Having antibodies to the virus that causes COVID-19 might provide protection from getting infected with the virus again.
If it does, we do not know how much protection the antibodies might provide or how long this protection might last.
You should continue to protect yourself and others since you could get infected with the virus again.
If you test negative, you might not have ever had COVID-19.
Talk with your healthcare provider about your test result and the type of test you took to understand what your result means.
Regardless of whether you test positive or negative, the results do not confirm whether or not you are able to spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
Until we know more, continue to take steps to protect yourself and others.
If you want more information about antibody tests, see Test for Past Infection.
Yes, it is possible.
You may test negative if the sample was collected early in your infection and test positive later during this illness.
You could also be exposed to COVID-19 after the test and get infected then.
Even if you test negative, you still should take steps to protect yourself and others.
See Testing for Current Infection for more information.
COVID-19 is a new disease and there is limited information regarding risk factors for severe disease.
Based on currently available information and clinical expertise, older adults and people with underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
If you are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19, you should:
Most people with disabilities are not inherently at higher risk for becoming infected with or having severe illness from COVID-19.
Some people with physical limitations or other disabilities might be at a higher risk of infection because of their underlying medical condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Contact tracing has been used for decades by state and local health departments to slow or stop the spread of infectious diseases.
Contact tracing slows the spread of COVID-19 by
During contact tracing, the health department staff will not ask you for
Discussions with health department staff are confidential.
This means that your personal and medical information will be kept private and only shared with those who may need to know, like your health care provider.
If you have been diagnosed with COVID-19, your name will not be shared with those you came in contact with.
The health department will only notify people you were in close contact with (within 6 feet for more than 15 minutes) that they might have been exposed to COVID-19.
Each state and jurisdiction use their own method for collecting and protecting health information.
To learn more, contact your state or local health department.
You may also be interested in: If I participate contact tracing for COVID-19 using a digital tool, is my personal health information secure?
For COVID-19, a close contact is anyone who was within 6 feet of an infected person for at least 15 minutes.
An infected person can spread COVID-19 starting 48 hours (or 2 days) before the person had any symptoms or tested positive for COVID-19.
Yes, you are still considered a close contact even if you were wearing a mask while you were around someone with COVID-19.
Masks are meant to protect other people in case you are infected, and not to protect you from becoming infected.
If you have been around someone who is sick with COVID-19, local authorities, the health department, or your doctor may recommend that you get tested for COVID-19.
The health department may be able to provide resources for testing in your area.
If you are diagnosed with COVID-19, someone from the health department may call you to check on your health, discuss who you have been around, and ask where you spent time while you may have been able to spread COVID-19 to others.
You will also be asked to continue to stay at home and self-isolate, away from others.
Watch for or monitor your symptoms of COVID-19.
If your symptoms worsen or become severe, you should seek medical care.
If you were around someone who has been diagnosed with COVID-19, someone from the health department may call you to let you know that you may have been exposed to COVID-19.
Stay home away from others for 14 days (self-quarantine) after your last contact with that person.
Health department staff will help identify the dates for your self-quarantine.
Health department staff can also provide resources for COVID-19 testing in your area.
Monitor your health and watch for symptoms of COVID-19.
Remember, symptoms may appear 2-14 days after you were exposed to COVID-19.
Tell the health department if you develop any symptoms.
Tell people you were around recently if you become ill, so they can monitor their health.
If your symptoms worsen or become severe, seek medical care.
Severe symptoms include trouble breathing, persistent pain or pressure in the chest, new confusion, inability to wake or stay awake, or bluish lips or face.
The health department staff will not ask you for
Yes.
You should still self-quarantine for 14 days since your last exposure.
It can take up to 14 days after exposure to the virus for a person to develop COVID-19 symptoms.
A negative result before end of the 14-day quarantine period does not rule out possible infection.
By self-quarantining for 14 days, you lower the chance of possibly exposing others to COVID-19.
People with COVID-19 can still spread the virus even if they dont have any symptoms.
If you were around someone who had COVID-19, it is critical that you stay home and away from others for 14 days from the last day that you were around that person.
Staying home and away from others at all times helps your health department in the fight against COVID-19 and helps protect you, your family, and your community.
If you have been around someone who was identified as a close contact to a person with COVID-19, closely monitor yourself for any symptoms of COVID-19.
You do not need to self-quarantine unless you develop symptoms or if the person identified as a close contact develops COVID-19.
No, there will not be a national app for contact tracing.
There are many options available now, and it is up to each state and individual to decide which tools best fit their needs.
Yes, if you agree to participate in contact tracing for COVID-19 with the health department, your information is secure.
Discussions with health department staff are confidential.
This means that your personal and medical information will be kept private and only shared with those who may need to know, like your health care provider.
Your name will not be shared with those you came in contact with.
If you have been diagnosed with COVID-19, the health department will only notify people you were in close contact with (within 6 feet for more than 15 minutes) that they might have been exposed to COVID-19.
Health departments may use case management tools to help make the contact tracing process more efficient.
If you choose to provide information through one of these tools, your information is secure and stored with the health department.
These tools also help health departments quickly receive and analyze information about COVID-19.
Case management tools are under the same laws and regulations for all sensitive health information use (e.g.
HIPPA).
You must provide consent for the health department to collect information using a case management tool.
Just like traditional contact tracing, digital tools will not collect information regarding money, Social Security numbers, bank account information, salary information, or credit card numbers.
Exposure notification tools may be an app that you can download on your personal cell phone.
If you choose to download an exposure notification app for COVID-19, your information is secure.
Exposure notification apps are developed in collaboration with or endorsed by health departments.
These apps undergo rigorous testing to determine their trustworthiness, security, and ability to protect peoples privacy.
Until you give consent to share information with your local health department, any information you have entered into the app is stored only on your personal phone.
Your information is stored only on your own phone and is not sent to the health department or any other third party.
The app and your information can be deleted any time.
When you consent to share your information with the local health department, your information is secure.
No, you are not required to download an app to give information for contact tracing for COVID-19.
Health departments commonly use case management tools to make the contact tracing process more efficient.
These types of tools are not downloaded on personal cell phones.
If you choose to give information to your local or state health department for contact tracing for COVID-19, you do not need to download an app on your cell phone.
The health department staff may call you to
It is up to you to decide if you download an exposure notification app for COVID-19.
There is currently no known risk associated with being in the same room at a funeral or visitation service with the body of someone who died of COVID-19.
See How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others to learn how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19, if you decide to attend a funeral or visitation.
COVID-19 is a new disease and we are still learning how it spreads.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
This type of spread is not a concern after death.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
This is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
People should consider not touching the body of someone who has died of COVID-19.
Older people and people of all ages with severe underlying health conditions are at higher risk of severe illness from COVID-19.
There may be less of a chance of the virus spreading from certain types of touching, such as holding the hand or hugging after the body has been prepared for viewing.
Other activities, such as kissing, washing, and shrouding should be avoided before, during, and after the body has been prepared, if possible.
If washing the body or shrouding are important religious or cultural practices, families are encouraged to work with their communitys cultural and religious leaders and funeral home staff on how to reduce their exposure as much as possible.
At a minimum, people conducting these activities should wear disposable gloves.
If splashing of fluids is expected, additional personal protective equipment (PPE) may be required (such as disposable gown, face shield, or goggles and N-95 respirator).
If desired, you may retrieve the belongings of a loved one who has died of COVID-19 outside their home (for example, in a hospital setting).
Depending on local rules and regulations, family members may retrieve these belongings at the funeral home or the healthcare facility.
You should use gloves and practice good hand hygiene when handling your loved ones belongings.
Depending on the type of belongings, such as electronics, you should also follow the household item-specific cleaning and disinfection guidelines when handling these items.
When a US citizen dies outside the United States, the deceased persons next of kin or legal representative should notify US consular officials at the Department of State.
Consular personnel are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, to provide assistance to US citizens for overseas emergencies.
If a family member, domestic partner, or legal representative is in a different country from the deceased person, he or she should call the Department of States Office of Overseas Citizens Services in Washington, DC, from 8 am to 5 pm Eastern time, Monday through Friday, at 888-407-4747 (toll-free) or 202-501-4444.
For emergency assistance after working hours or on weekends and holidays, call the Department of State switchboard at 202-647-4000 and ask to speak with the Overseas Citizens Services duty officer.
In addition, the US embassyexternal iconexternal iconexternal icon closest to or in the country where the US citizen died can provide assistance.
CDC does not require an autopsy before the remains of a person who died overseas are returned to the United States.
Depending on the circumstances surrounding the death, some countries may require an autopsy.
Sources of support to the family include the local consulate or embassy, travel insurance provider, tour operator, faith-based and aid organizations, and the deceaseds employer.
There likely will need to be an official identification of the body and official documents issued by the consular office.
CDC requirements for importing human remains depend upon if the body has been embalmed, cremated, or if the person died from a quarantinable communicable disease.
At this time, COVID-19 is a quarantinable communicable disease in the United States and the remains must meet the standards for importation found in 42 Code of Federal Regulations Part 71.55 and may be cleared, released, and authorized for entry into the United States only under the following conditions:
Please see CDCs guidance for additional information.
Cleaning with soap and water removes germs, dirt, and impurities from surfaces.
It lowers the risk of spreading infection.
Disinfecting kills germs on surfaces.
By killing germs on a surface after cleaning, it can further lower the risk of spreading infection.
The risk of transmitting or spreading SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, during vacuuming is unknown.
In order to reduce the need for cleaning, disinfection, and vacuuming, consider removing area rugs completely, if possible.
At this time, there are no reported cases of COVID-19 associated with vacuuming.
If vacuuming is necessary or required in a school, business, or community facility that was used by a person with suspected or confirmed COVID-19, first follow the CDC recommendations for Cleaning and Disinfection for Community Facilities that apply, which includes a wait time of 24 hours, or as long as practical.
After cleaning and disinfection, the following recommendations may help reduce the risk to workers and other individuals when vacuuming:
Routine cleaning is the everyday cleaning practices that businesses and communities normally use to maintain a healthy environment.
Surfaces frequently touched by multiple people, such as door handles, bathroom surfaces, and handrails, should be cleaned with soap and water or another detergent at least daily when facilities are in use.
More frequent cleaning and disinfection may be required based on level of use.
For example, certain surfaces and objects in public spaces, such as shopping carts and point of sale keypads, should be cleaned and disinfected before each use.
Cleaning removes dirt and impurities, including germs, from surfaces.
Cleaning alone does not kill germs, but it reduces the number of germs on a surface.
Cleaning does not kill germs, but by removing them, it lowers their numbers and the risk of spreading infection.
If a surface may have gotten the virus on it from a person with or suspected to have COVID-19, the surface should be cleaned and disinfected.
Disinfecting kills germs on surfaces.
Regular cleaning staff can clean and disinfect community spaces.
Cleaning staff should be trained on appropriate use of cleaning and disinfection chemicals and provided with the personal protective equipment (PPE) required for the chemicals used.
Companies do not necessarily need to close after a person with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 has been in a company facility.
The area(s) used or visited by the ill person should be closed for 24 hours or as long as possible.
Open outside doors and windows as much as possible ensuring that doing so does not pose a safety risk to children using the facility (i.e.
make sure that children are not able to enter the closed off area through any windows or doors).
and use ventilating fans to increase air circulation in the area.
Once the area has been appropriately disinfected, it can be opened for use.
Workers without close contact with the person with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 can return to work immediately after disinfection is completed.
The efficacy of these disinfection methods against the virus that causes COVID-19 is not known.
EPA only recommends use of the surface disinfectants identified on List Nexternal icon against the virus that causes COVID-19.
EPA does not routinely review the safety or efficacy of pesticidal devices, such as UV lights, LED lights, or ultrasonic devices.
Therefore, EPA cannot confirm whether, or under what circumstances, such products might be effective against the spread of COVID-19.
Outdoor areas generally require normal routine cleaning and do not require disinfection.
Spraying disinfectant on outdoor playgrounds is not an efficient use of disinfectant supplies and has not been proven to reduce the risk of COVID-19 to the public.
You should maintain existing cleaning and hygiene practices for outdoor areas.
If practical, high touch surfaces made of plastic or metal, such as grab bars and railings, should be cleaned routinely.
Cleaning and disinfection of wooden surfaces (e.g play structures, benches, tables) or groundcovers (e.g mulch, sand) is not recommended.
CDC does not recommend the use of sanitizing tunnels.
There is no evidence that they are effective in reducing the spread of COVID-19.
Chemicals used in sanitizing tunnels could cause skin, eye, or respiratory irritation or damage.
CDC does not recommend disinfection of sidewalks or roads.
Spraying disinfectant on sidewalks and roads is not an efficient use of disinfectant supplies and has not been proven to reduce the risk of COVID-19 to the public.
The risk of spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 from these surfaces is very low and disinfection is not effective on these surfaces.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
See If You Have Pets for more information about pets and COVID-19.
However, since animals can spread other diseases to people, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, such as washing your hands and maintaining good hygiene.
For more information on the many benefits of pet ownership, as well as staying safe and healthy around animals including pets, livestock, and wildlife, visit CDCs Healthy Pets, Healthy People website.
Although we know certain bacteria and fungi can be carried on fur and hair, there is no evidence that viruses, including the virus that causes COVID-19, can spread to people from the skin, fur, or hair of pets.
However, because animals can sometimes carry other germs that can make people sick, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, including washing hands before and after interacting with them.
Dog parks provide socialization and exercise for dogs, which is an important part of their wellbeing.
Because there is a risk that people with COVID-19 could spread it to animals, CDC recommends that you do not let pets interact with people outside of your household, especially in places with community spread of COVID-19.
Therefore, you should consider avoiding dog parks or other places where large numbers of people and dogs gather.
Some areas are allowing dog parks to open.
If you choose to go to a dog park, follow local guidelines.
There are ways to reduce the risk of you or your dog getting infected with COVID-19 if you go to a dog park.
See more information on pets and COVID-19 and recommendations for how to help keep your pet safe.
Until we know more about how this virus affects animals, CDC encourages pet owners to treat pets as you would other human family members to protect them from possible infection.
This means limiting contact between your pets and people outside your household as much as possible and avoiding places where large numbers of people gather.
Some areas are allowing groomers and boarding facilities such as dog daycares to open.
If you must take your pet to a groomer or boarding facility, follow any protocols put into place at the facility, such as wearing a mask and maintaining at least 6 feet of space between yourself and others if possible.
Limit pet items brought from home to the groomer or boarding facility, and disinfect any objects that are taken into a facility and returned home (such as leashes, bowls, and toys).
Use an EPA-registered disinfectantexternal icon to clean items and rinse thoroughly with clean water afterwards.
Do not wipe or bathe your pet with chemical disinfectants, alcohol, hydrogen peroxide, or other products, such as hand sanitizer, counter-cleaning wipes, or other industrial or surface cleaners.
If you have questions about appropriate products for bathing or cleaning your pet, talk to your veterinarian.
Do not put masks on pets, and do not take a sick pet to a groomer or boarding facility.
Signs of sickness in dogs may include fever, coughing, difficulty breathing or shortness of breath, lethargy, sneezing, discharge from the nose or eyes, vomiting, or diarrhea.
If you think your pet is sick, call your veterinarian.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
See more information on pets and COVID-19 and recommendations for how to help keep your pet safe.
Most pets that have gotten sick from the virus that causes COVID-19 were infected after close contact with a person with COVID-19.
Talk to your veterinarian about any health concerns you have about your pets.
If your pet gets sick after contact with a person with COVID-19, call your veterinarian and let them know the pet was around a person with COVID-19.
If you are sick with COVID-19, do not take your pet to the veterinary clinic yourself.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
Routine testing of animals for COVID-19 is not recommended at this time.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
However, it appears that the virus that causes COVID-19 can spread from people to animals after close contact with people with COVID-19.
Until we learn more about how this virus affects animals, use similar precautions for pets and other animals in your facility as you would for other people in your facility.
This will help protect both people and pets in your facility from COVID-19.
Talk to a veterinarian if a pet in your facility gets sick or if you have any concerns about the health of any pets in the facility.
If you think a pet in the facility was exposed to or is showing signs consistent with COVID-19, contact your state health official to discuss guidance on testing pets or other animals for the virus that causes COVID-19.
People who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 should avoid providing care for sick pets, if possible.
For more information, visit CDCs If You Have Pets webpage.
CDC does not have any evidence to suggest that imported animals or animal products pose a risk for spreading COVID-19 in the United States.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
CDC, the U. S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) play distinct but complementary roles in regulating the importation of live animals and animal products into the United States.
Please refer to CDCs requirements for bringing a dog to the United States.
The current requirements for rabies vaccination apply to dogs imported from high-risk countries for rabies.
Imported animals will need to meet CDC and USDAsexternal iconexternal icon requirements for entering the United States.
At this time, there is no evidence that companion animals, including pets and service animals, can spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
As with any animal introduced to a new environment, animals recently imported should be observed daily for signs of illness.
If an animal becomes ill, the animal should be examined by a veterinarian.
Call your local veterinary clinic before bringing the animal into the clinic and let them know that the animal was recently imported from another country.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
Currently, there is no evidence to suggest the virus that causes COVID-19 is circulating in free-living wildlife in the United States, or that wildlife might be a source of infection for people in the United States.
If a wild animal were to become infected with the virus, we dont know whether the infection could then spread among wildlife or if it could spread to other animals, including pets.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals, including wildlife, could be affected by COVID-19.
Because wildlife can carry other diseases, even without looking sick, it is always important to enjoy wildlife from a distance.
Take steps to prevent getting sick from wildlife in the United States:
See COVID-19 and Animals for more information.
Other coronaviruses have been found in North American bats in the past, but there is currently no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 is present in any free-living wildlife in the United States, including bats.
In general, coronaviruses do not cause illness or death in bats, but we dont yet know if this new coronavirus would make North American species of bats sick.
Bats are an important part of natural ecosystems, and their populations are already declining in the United States.
Bat populations could be further threatened by the disease itself or by harm inflicted on bats resulting from a misconception that bats are spreading COVID-19.
However, there is no evidence that bats in the United States are a source of the virus that causes COVID-19 for people.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how bats could be affected by COVID-19.
Currently, there is no evidence that you can get infected with the virus that causes COVID-19 by eating food, including wild hunted game meat.
However, hunters can get infected with other diseases when processing or eating game.
Hunters should always practice good hygiene when processing animals by following these food safety recommendations:
You should follow your state and/or local jurisdictional guidance regarding continuing operations at your facility.
There have not been any reports of horses testing positive for the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
COVID-19 is primarily spread from person to person, so steps should be taken to reduce the risks for people visiting your facility.
For more information, see Guidance on Preparing Workplaces for COVID-19pdf iconexternal icon and Interim Guidance for Businesses and Employers to Plan and Respond to Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Community mitigation is especially important before a vaccine or drug becomes widely available.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
Individual people, communities, schools, businesses, and healthcare organizations have a role to play in community mitigation.
Policies*, which include limits on large gatherings, restrictions on businesses, and school closures are often needed to fully put in place community mitigation strategies.
Each community is unique.
Because some actions can be very disruptive to daily life, mitigation activities will be different depending on how much disease has spread within the community, what the community population is like, and the ability to take these actions at the local level.
To identify appropriate activities, all parts of a community that might be affected need to be considered, including populations most vulnerable to severe illness, and those who might be more affected socially or economically.
When selecting mitigation activities, states and communities need to consider the spread of disease locally, characteristics of the people who live in the community (for example, age groups, languages spoken, overall health status), and the kind of public health resources and healthcare systems (like hospitals) that are available in the community.
State and local officials may need to adjust community mitigation activities and immediately take steps to scale them up or down depending on the changing local situation.
Putting mitigation into practice is based on
*CDC cannot address the policies of any business or organization.
CDC shares recommendations based on the best available science to help people make decisions that improve their health and safety.
In all cases, follow the guidance of your healthcare provider and local health department.
Local decisions depend on local circumstances.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
Currently there is no evidence that people can get COVID-19 by eating or handling food.
It may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object, such as a food package or dining ware that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
There is also no current evidence that people can get COVID-19 by drinking water.
The COVID-19 virus has not been detected in drinking water.
Conventional water treatment methods that use filtration and disinfection, such as those in most municipal drinking water systems, should remove or kill the virus that causes COVID-19.​ Learn more about food and COVID-19.
The virus that causes COVID-19 has not been detected in treated drinking water.
Water treatment plants use filters and disinfectants to remove or kill germs, like the virus that causes COVID-19.
The Environmental Protection Agency regulates water treatment plants to ensure that treated water is safe to drink.
Currently, there is no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 can be spread to people by drinking treated water.
COVID-19 is spread mainly through close contact from person-to-person.
You can continue to use and drink water from your tap as usual.
The virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in the feces of some patients diagnosed with COVID-19.
However, it is unclear whether the virus found in feces may be capable of causing COVID-19.
There has not been any confirmed report of the virus spreading from feces to a person.
Scientists also do not know how much risk there is that the virus could be spread from the feces of an infected person to another person.
However, they think this risk is low based on data from previous outbreaks of diseases caused by related coronaviruses, such as severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS).
Recently, ribonucleic acid (RNA) from the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater, and no information to date that anyone has become sick with COVID-19 because of exposure to wastewater.
At this time, the risk of transmission of the virus that causes COVID-19 through properly designed and maintained sewerage systems is thought to be low.
Recently, ribonucleic acid (RNA) from the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater, and no information to date that anyone has become sick with COVID-19 because of exposure to wastewater.
Standard practices associated with wastewater treatment plant operations should be sufficient to protect wastewater workers from the virus that causes COVID-19.
These standard practices can include engineering and administrative controls, hygiene precautions, specific safe work practices, and personal protective equipment (PPE) normally required when handling untreated wastewater.
No additional COVID-19–specific protections are recommended for workers involved in wastewater management, including those at wastewater treatment facilities.
See Information for Wastewater and Sanitation System Workers on COVID-19 for additional information.
In most cases, it is safe to wash your hands with soap and tap water during a Boil Water Advisory.
Follow the guidance from your local public health officials.
If soap and water are not available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in pools, hot tubs, or water playgrounds.
Plus, proper operation of public pools, hot tubs, and water playgrounds (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) and disinfection of the water (with chlorine or bromine) should inactivate the virus.
The virus mainly spreads when respiratory droplets from infected people land in the mouths or noses of others or possibly when inhaled into the lungs by others.
If a public pool, hot tub, or water playground is open, it is important for all visitors and staff to take steps to slow the spread of the virus:
See Considerations for Public Pools, Hot Tubs, and Water Playgrounds for more information.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in pools, including saltwater pools.
Plus, proper operation of public pools (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) and disinfection of the water (with chlorine or bromine) should inactivate the virus.
Saltwater pools are chlorinated pools.
In traditional pools, chlorine products (such as granules or liquid bleach) are added to the water to disinfect it.
In saltwater pools, table salt (made up of sodium and chloride) is added to the water, and an electrical current is then run through the water with dissolved salt.
This creates the same disinfecting form of chlorine that is created when chlorine products are added to the water in traditional pools.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in lakes, oceans, rivers, or other natural bodies of water.
The virus mainly spreads when respiratory droplets from infected people land in the mouths or noses of others or possibly when inhaled into the lungs by others.
If a public beach or other swim area in a natural body of water is open, it is important for all visitors and staff to take steps to slow the spread of the virus:
See Considerations for Public Beaches for more information.
RNAexternal icon of the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater, which can come from combined sewer overflowsexternal icon (rainwater runoff, domestic sewage, and industrial wastewater) and other sourcesexternal icon (such as, leaking septic tanks or animal waste from farms nearby) and enter swim areas.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater.
Plus, CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus being spread by swallowing or coming in contact with water contaminated by feces (poop) from an infected person.
At lakes, oceans, and rivers with routine water quality monitoring programs, staff look for changes in fecal (poop) contamination of the water.
Water quality advisories and beach closures alert the public to avoid getting in or on the water because of increased fecal contamination.
Learn more about healthy swimming in natural bodies of water and access water quality information by state.
No, do NOT wear a cloth mask in the water.
It can be difficult to breathe through a cloth mask when it is wet.
Plus, wet cloth masks dont slow the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19 as well as dry cloth masks.
All of this means it is particularly important to stay at least 6 feet apart in the water from people you dont live with.
In case cloth masks do get wet by mistake, bring a second (or extra) cloth mask for everyone heading out to the public pool or beach.
CDC does not yet have evidence on the effectiveness of different types of cloth materials.
Wearing cloth masks can help prevent people infected with the virus that causes COVID-19 from spreading the virus.
Make sure your cloth mask:
Cloth masks should NOT be worn by children less than 2 years old or anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Learn more about how to wear, take off, and wash your cloth masks.
The design of the public pool, hot tub, or water playground and surrounding deck and if visitors live together or not will affect how many people can stay at least 6 feet apart from those they dont live with.
CDC recommends operators of public pools, hot tubs, and water playgrounds:
Operators might want to limit the number of people in and around the water so if the water needs to be evacuated (because of lightning or other health or safety threat) social distancing can be maintained on the deck.
Otherwise, if the water is evacuated and social distancing cannot be maintained on the deck, close the deck to visitors.
There is no standard formula to determine how many people can maintain social distancing in the water and on the surrounding deck.
See Considerations for Public Pools, Hot Tubs, and Water Playgrounds for more information.
No.
Only List N disinfectants approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agencyexternal icon should be used to disinfect surfaces (such as handrails and in bathrooms) and shared objects (such as kickboards and pool noodles).
The list includes hundreds of disinfectants.
Operators of public pools, hot tubs, or water playgrounds (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) should consult with the design company or engineer to determine which disinfectants are best suited for surfaces and with manufacturers to determine which disinfectants are best suited for shared objects.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectants.
We dont know yet.
Early scientific data suggest that SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, can be inactivated by the suns UV light.
However, the ability of the suns UV light to inactivate the virus on surfaces (such as handrails and in bathrooms) and shared objects (such as kickboards and pool noodles) needs more research.
Factors — such as cloudiness, latitude (distance from equator), time of day, and amount of time exposed to the suns UV light — will determine how effectively the virus is inactivated.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectantsexternal icon.
The more frequently a surface is touched by multiple people, the more frequently it should be cleaned and then disinfected with a List N disinfectant approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agencyexternal icon.
Frequently touched surfaces should be cleaned and disinfected at least daily.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectants.
No.
RNAexternal icon of the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in feces (poop).
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in feces.
Plus, CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus being spread by swallowing or coming in contact with water contaminated by feces from an infected person.
As a result, CDC has not changed its fecal incident response recommendations.
Remember, do NOT vacuum feces out of the water.
Not when lifeguards are actively lifeguarding.
Lifeguards actively lifeguarding should not be doing other tasks that could distract them.
Drowning deaths have resulted, at least in part, from lifeguards being distracted.
Drowning can occur quickly and quietly.
Learn and take steps to prevent drowning.
Lifeguard trainers can consider the following steps to slow the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19:
CDC has more COVID-19–related considerations for public pools and public beaches and non-COVID-19–related healthy and safe swimming resources.
Help control the spread of rumors and be aware of fraud schemes.
1Fever may be subjective or confirmed
2Close contact is defined as—
a) being within approximately 6 feet (2 meters) of a COVID-19 case for a prolonged period of time; close contact can occur while caring for, living with, visiting, or sharing a health care waiting area or room with a COVID-19 case
b) having direct contact with infectious secretions of a COVID-19 case (e.g being coughed on)
If such contact occurs while not wearing recommended personal protective equipment or PPE (e.g gowns, gloves, NIOSH-certified disposable N95 respirator, eye protection), criteria for PUI consideration are met
See CDCs updated Interim Healthcare Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Persons Under Investigation for 2019 Novel Coronavirus.
Data to inform the definition of close contact are limited.
Considerations when assessing close contact include the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk) and the clinical symptoms of the person with COVID-19 (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk as does exposure to a severely ill patient).
Special consideration should be given to those exposed in health care settings.
A novel coronavirus is a new coronavirus that has not been previously identified.
The virus causing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), is not the same as the coronaviruses that commonly circulate among humans and cause mild illness, like the common cold.
On February 11, 2020 the World Health Organization announced an official name for the disease that is causing the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak, first identified in Wuhan China.
The new name of this disease is coronavirus disease 2019, abbreviated as COVID-19.
In COVID-19, ‘CO stands for ‘corona, ‘VI for ‘virus, and ‘D for disease.
Formerly, this disease was referred to as 2019 novel coronavirus or 2019-nCoV.
There are many types of human coronaviruses including some that commonly cause mild upper-respiratory tract illnesses.
COVID-19 is a new disease, caused by a novel (or new) coronavirus that has not previously been seen in humans.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person to person, mainly through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
Spread is more likely when people are in close contact with one another (within about 6 feet).
COVID-19 seems to be spreading easily and sustainably in the community (community spread) in many affected geographic areas.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
It is not yet known whether weather and temperature affect the spread of COVID-19.
Some other viruses, like those that cause the common cold and flu, spread more during cold weather months but that does not mean it is impossible to become sick with these viruses during other months.
There is much more to learn about the transmissibility, severity, and other features associated with COVID-19 and investigations are ongoing.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Each health department determines community spread differently based on local conditions.
For information on community spread in your area, please visit your health departments website.​
At this time, CDC has no data to suggest that this new coronavirus or other similar coronaviruses are spread by mosquitoes or ticks.
The main way that COVID-19 spreads is from person to person.
See How Coronavirus Spreads for more information.
Visit the How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others page to learn about how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19.
Wear masks in public settings when around people not living in your household and particularly where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, such as grocery stores, pharmacies, and gas stations.
Masks may slow the spread of the virus and help people who may have the virus and do not know it from transmitting it to others.
COVID-19 can be spread by people who do not have symptoms and do not know that they are infected.
Thats why its important for everyone to practice social distancing (staying at least 6 feet away from other people) and wear masks in public settings.
Masks provide an extra layer to help prevent the respiratory droplets from traveling in the air and onto other people.
The masks recommended are not surgical masks or N-95 respirators.
Those are critical supplies that must continue to be reserved for healthcare workers and other medical first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
More information about masks can be found on our masks site.
For more information, see Groups at Higher Risk for Severe Illness.
There is still a lot that is unknown about COVID-19 and how it spreads.
Coronaviruses are thought to be spread most often by respiratory droplets.
Although the virus can survive for a short period on some surfaces, it is unlikely to be spread from domestic or international mail, products or packaging.
However, it may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Learn more about safe handling of deliveries and mail.
In healthcare settings across the United States, donated blood is a lifesaving, essential part of caring for patients.
The need for donated blood is constant, and blood centers are open and in urgent need of donations.
CDC encourages people who are well to continue to donate blood if they are able, even if they are practicing social distancing because of COVID-19.
CDC is supporting blood centers by providing recommendations that will keep donors and staff safe.
Examples of these recommendations include spacing donor chairs 6 feet apart, thoroughly adhering to environmental cleaning practices, and encouraging donors to make donation appointments ahead of time.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Handwashing is one of the best ways to protect yourself and your family from getting sick.
Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing; going to the bathroom; and before eating or preparing food.
If soap and water are not readily available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces such as tables, doorknobs, light switches, countertops, handles, desks, phones, keyboards, toilets, faucets, and sinks.
If surfaces are dirty, clean them using detergent or soap and water prior to disinfection.
To disinfect, most common EPA-registered household disinfectants will work.
See CDCs recommendations for household cleaning and disinfection.
Most people who get COVID-19 will be able to recover at home.
CDC has directions for people who are recovering at home and their caregivers, including:
However, some people may need emergency medical attention.
Watch for symptoms and learn when to seek emergency medical attention.
When to Seek Emergency Medical Attention
Look for emergency warning signs* for COVID-19.
If someone is showing any of these signs, seek emergency medical care immediately
*This list is not all possible symptoms.
Please call your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 or call ahead to your local emergency facility: Notify the operator that you are seeking care for someone who has or may have COVID-19.
Based on available evidence, children do not appear to be at higher risk for COVID-19 than adults.
While some children and infants have been sick with COVID-19, adults make up most of the known cases to date.
However, a few children have developed multisystem inflammatory syndrome (MIS-C).
Currently, information about this syndrome is limited.
CDC is working with state and local health departments to learn more about MIS-C.
You can encourage your child to help stop the spread of COVID-19 by teaching them to do the same things everyone should do to stay healthy.
You can find additional information on preventing COVID-19 at How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others.
More information on Keeping Children Healthy during the COVID-19 Outbreak is available online.
No.
The symptoms of COVID-19 are similar in children and adults.
COVID-19 can look different in different people.
For many people, being sick with COVID-19 would be a little bit like having the flu.
People can get a fever, cough, or have a hard time taking deep breaths.
Most people who have gotten COVID-19 have not gotten very sick.
Only a small group of people who get it have had more serious problems.
CDC and partners are investigating cases of multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) associated with COVID-19.
Learn more about COVID-19 and multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C).
CDC recommends that everyone 2 years and older wear a mask that covers their nose and mouth in public settings when around people not living in your household, particularly where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain.
Masks should NOT be put on babies or children younger than 2 because of the danger of suffocation.
Children younger than 2 years of age are listed as an exception as well as anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Outbreaks can be stressful for adults and children.
When you talk with your child, try to stay calm, and reassure them that they are safe.
Talk to your children about COVID-19 and help them cope with stress.
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) is a condition where different body parts can become inflamed, including the heart, lungs, kidneys, brain, skin, eyes, or gastrointestinal organs.
We do not yet know what causes MIS-C.
However, we know that many children with MIS-C had the virus that causes COVID-19, or had been around someone with COVID-19.
MIS-C can be serious, even deadly, but most children who were diagnosed with this condition have gotten better with medical care.
Contact your childs doctor, nurse, or clinic right away if your child is showing symptoms of MIS-C. Seek emergency care right away if your child is showing any of these emergency warning signs of MIS-C or other concerning signs.
The key to slowing the spread of COVID-19 is to practice social distancing.
While school is out, children should not have in-person playdates with children from other households.
If children are playing outside their own homes, it is essential that they remain 6 feet from anyone who is not in their own household.
Some children with certain underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Make sure children practice everyday preventive behaviors, such as washing their hands often with soap and water.
Remember, if children meet outside of school in groups, it can put everyone at risk.
For more information, see Help Stop the Spread of COVID-19 in Children.
For more information, see Help Children Learn at Home.
Check with your school on plans to continue meal services during the school dismissal.
Many schools are keeping school facilities open to allow families to pick up meals or are providing grab-and-go meals at a central location.
For more information, see Keep Children Healthy during the COVID-19 Outbreak.
Older adults and people who have serious underlying medical conditions are at highest risk of getting sick from COVID-19.
Its not known yet whether all children with underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Although most COVID-19 cases in children are not severe, serious illness that needs to be treated at the hospital still happens.
Some data on children reported that the majority who needed hospitalization for COVID-19 had at least one underlying medical condition.
The most common underlying conditions reported among children with COVID-19 include chronic lung disease (including asthma), heart disease, and conditions that weaken the immune system.
This information suggests that children with these underlying medical conditions may be at risk for more severe illness from COVID-19.
More data are needed to learn which underlying or complex medical conditions may put children at increased risk.
CDC is monitoring new information as it becomes available and will provide updates as needed.
Learn more about caring for children with special health care needs during a disaster and people who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
In addition to following the recommendations to prevent getting sick and running essential errands, families should take extra steps recommended for persons with higher risk of severe COVID-19 illness and steps outlined for those with potential COVID-19 exposure or confirmed illness.
Helping children understand and follow recommendations, like social distancing and wearing masks, can be challenging if your child has intellectual disabilities, sensory issues, or other special healthcare needs.
Supporting children with special healthcare needs can put additional demands and stress on families, especially during emergency situations.
You have likely found ways to manage the stress and challenges unique to your familys situation.
It is important to continue your familys coping methods, including reaching out to other family members, friends, support groups, and organizations that have been helpful in the past.
See information on helping children cope and coping with stress (such as visiting parks, trails, or open spaces) and making your family stronger.
If you, or someone you care about, are feeling overwhelmed with emotions like sadness, depression, or anxiety, or feel like you want to harm yourself or others:
If your child with special healthcare needs becomes sick with symptoms of COVID-19, contact your childs healthcare provider.
If your child has new or worsening emergency warning signs, such as trouble breathing, pain or pressure in the chest, confusion or inability to wake them up, or bluish lips or face, call 911.
If you think your child may have COVID-19, notify the operator so that first responders may be appropriately prepared to protect themselves and others.
Notify your childs healthcare provider if someone else in your house becomes sick with COVID-19, so they can provide any advice specific for your child.
See additional information if someone in the home is sick with COVID-19 or suspected of having COVID-19.
If your childs healthcare provider tells you to go to the hospital for any health problem, including COVID-19
Create a household plan of action to help protect your health and the health of those you care about in the event of an outbreak of COVID-19 in your community:
Plan for potential changes at your workplace.
Talk to your employer about their emergency operations plan, including sick-leave policies and telework options.
Learn how businesses and employers can plan for and respond to COVID-19.
CDC does not encourage the production and use of homemade hand sanitizer products because of concerns over the correct use of the ingredientsexternal icon and the need to work under sterile conditions to make the product.
Local industries that are looking into producing hand sanitizer to fill in for commercial shortages can refer to the World Health Organization guidance.pdf iconexternal icon Organizations should revert to the use of commercially produced, FDA-approved product once such supplies again become available.
People with COVID-19 have reported a wide range of symptoms – from mild symptoms to severe illness.
Symptoms may appear 2-14 days after exposure to the virus.
If you have fever, cough, or other symptoms, you might have COVID-19.
Look for emergency warning signs* for COVID-19.
If someone is showing any of these signs, seek emergency medical care immediately
*This list is not all possible symptoms.
Please call your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 or call ahead to your local emergency facility: Notify the operator that you are seeking care for someone who has or may have COVID-19.
Yes.
It is possible to test positive for flu (as well as other respiratory infections) and COVID-19 at the same time.
Maybe; not everyone needs to be tested for COVID-19.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and want to get tested, call your healthcare provider first.
Most people will have mild illness and can recover at home without medical care and may not need to be tested.
CDC has guidance for who should be tested, but decisions about testing are made by state and local health departments and healthcare providers.
You can also visit your state or local health departments website to look for the latest local information on testing.
Decisions about testing are made by state and localexternal icon health departments or healthcare providers.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and are not tested, it is important to stay home.
What to do if you are sick.
COVID-19 testing differs by location.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and want to get tested, call your healthcare provider first.
You can also visit your state or localexternal icon health departments website to look for the latest local information on testing.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized viral tests that let you collect either a nasal swabexternal icon or a saliva sampleexternal icon at home.
However, you will still need to send your sample to a laboratory for analysis.
If you test positive for COVID-19, know what protective steps to take if you are sick or caring for someone.
If you test negative for COVID-19, you probably were not infected at the time your sample was collected.
However, that does not mean you will not get sick.
The test result only means that you did not have COVID-19 at the time of testing.
You might test negative if the sample was collected early in your infection and test positive later during your illness.
You could also be exposed to COVID-19 after the test and get infected then.
This means you could still spread the virus.
If you develop symptoms later, you might need another test to determine if you are infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.
For more information about viral tests, please visit Test for Current Infection.
Antibody tests for COVID-19 are available through healthcare providers and laboratories.
Check with your healthcare provider to see if they offer antibody tests and whether you should get one.
A positive test result shows you might have antibodies from an infection with the virus that causes COVID-19.
However, there is a chance a positive result means that you have antibodies from an infection with a virus from the same family of viruses (called coronaviruses), such as the one that causes the common cold.
Having antibodies to the virus that causes COVID-19 might provide protection from getting infected with the virus again.
If it does, we do not know how much protection the antibodies might provide or how long this protection might last.
You should continue to protect yourself and others since you could get infected with the virus again.
If you test negative, you might not have ever had COVID-19.
Talk with your healthcare provider about your test result and the type of test you took to understand what your result means.
Regardless of whether you test positive or negative, the results do not confirm whether or not you are able to spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
Until we know more, continue to take steps to protect yourself and others.
If you want more information about antibody tests, see Test for Past Infection.
Yes, it is possible.
You may test negative if the sample was collected early in your infection and test positive later during this illness.
You could also be exposed to COVID-19 after the test and get infected then.
Even if you test negative, you still should take steps to protect yourself and others.
See Testing for Current Infection for more information.
COVID-19 is a new disease and there is limited information regarding risk factors for severe disease.
Based on currently available information and clinical expertise, older adults and people with underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
If you are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19, you should:
Most people with disabilities are not inherently at higher risk for becoming infected with or having severe illness from COVID-19.
Some people with physical limitations or other disabilities might be at a higher risk of infection because of their underlying medical condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Contact tracing has been used for decades by state and local health departments to slow or stop the spread of infectious diseases.
Contact tracing slows the spread of COVID-19 by
During contact tracing, the health department staff will not ask you for
Discussions with health department staff are confidential.
This means that your personal and medical information will be kept private and only shared with those who may need to know, like your health care provider.
If you have been diagnosed with COVID-19, your name will not be shared with those you came in contact with.
The health department will only notify people you were in close contact with (within 6 feet for more than 15 minutes) that they might have been exposed to COVID-19.
Each state and jurisdiction use their own method for collecting and protecting health information.
To learn more, contact your state or local health department.
You may also be interested in: If I participate contact tracing for COVID-19 using a digital tool, is my personal health information secure?
For COVID-19, a close contact is anyone who was within 6 feet of an infected person for at least 15 minutes.
An infected person can spread COVID-19 starting 48 hours (or 2 days) before the person had any symptoms or tested positive for COVID-19.
Yes, you are still considered a close contact even if you were wearing a mask while you were around someone with COVID-19.
Masks are meant to protect other people in case you are infected, and not to protect you from becoming infected.
If you have been around someone who is sick with COVID-19, local authorities, the health department, or your doctor may recommend that you get tested for COVID-19.
The health department may be able to provide resources for testing in your area.
If you are diagnosed with COVID-19, someone from the health department may call you to check on your health, discuss who you have been around, and ask where you spent time while you may have been able to spread COVID-19 to others.
You will also be asked to continue to stay at home and self-isolate, away from others.
Watch for or monitor your symptoms of COVID-19.
If your symptoms worsen or become severe, you should seek medical care.
If you were around someone who has been diagnosed with COVID-19, someone from the health department may call you to let you know that you may have been exposed to COVID-19.
Stay home away from others for 14 days (self-quarantine) after your last contact with that person.
Health department staff will help identify the dates for your self-quarantine.
Health department staff can also provide resources for COVID-19 testing in your area.
Monitor your health and watch for symptoms of COVID-19.
Remember, symptoms may appear 2-14 days after you were exposed to COVID-19.
Tell the health department if you develop any symptoms.
Tell people you were around recently if you become ill, so they can monitor their health.
If your symptoms worsen or become severe, seek medical care.
Severe symptoms include trouble breathing, persistent pain or pressure in the chest, new confusion, inability to wake or stay awake, or bluish lips or face.
The health department staff will not ask you for
Yes.
You should still self-quarantine for 14 days since your last exposure.
It can take up to 14 days after exposure to the virus for a person to develop COVID-19 symptoms.
A negative result before end of the 14-day quarantine period does not rule out possible infection.
By self-quarantining for 14 days, you lower the chance of possibly exposing others to COVID-19.
People with COVID-19 can still spread the virus even if they dont have any symptoms.
If you were around someone who had COVID-19, it is critical that you stay home and away from others for 14 days from the last day that you were around that person.
Staying home and away from others at all times helps your health department in the fight against COVID-19 and helps protect you, your family, and your community.
If you have been around someone who was identified as a close contact to a person with COVID-19, closely monitor yourself for any symptoms of COVID-19.
You do not need to self-quarantine unless you develop symptoms or if the person identified as a close contact develops COVID-19.
No, there will not be a national app for contact tracing.
There are many options available now, and it is up to each state and individual to decide which tools best fit their needs.
Yes, if you agree to participate in contact tracing for COVID-19 with the health department, your information is secure.
Discussions with health department staff are confidential.
This means that your personal and medical information will be kept private and only shared with those who may need to know, like your health care provider.
Your name will not be shared with those you came in contact with.
If you have been diagnosed with COVID-19, the health department will only notify people you were in close contact with (within 6 feet for more than 15 minutes) that they might have been exposed to COVID-19.
Health departments may use case management tools to help make the contact tracing process more efficient.
If you choose to provide information through one of these tools, your information is secure and stored with the health department.
These tools also help health departments quickly receive and analyze information about COVID-19.
Case management tools are under the same laws and regulations for all sensitive health information use (e.g.
HIPPA).
You must provide consent for the health department to collect information using a case management tool.
Just like traditional contact tracing, digital tools will not collect information regarding money, Social Security numbers, bank account information, salary information, or credit card numbers.
Exposure notification tools may be an app that you can download on your personal cell phone.
If you choose to download an exposure notification app for COVID-19, your information is secure.
Exposure notification apps are developed in collaboration with or endorsed by health departments.
These apps undergo rigorous testing to determine their trustworthiness, security, and ability to protect peoples privacy.
Until you give consent to share information with your local health department, any information you have entered into the app is stored only on your personal phone.
Your information is stored only on your own phone and is not sent to the health department or any other third party.
The app and your information can be deleted any time.
When you consent to share your information with the local health department, your information is secure.
No, you are not required to download an app to give information for contact tracing for COVID-19.
Health departments commonly use case management tools to make the contact tracing process more efficient.
These types of tools are not downloaded on personal cell phones.
If you choose to give information to your local or state health department for contact tracing for COVID-19, you do not need to download an app on your cell phone.
The health department staff may call you to
It is up to you to decide if you download an exposure notification app for COVID-19.
There is currently no known risk associated with being in the same room at a funeral or visitation service with the body of someone who died of COVID-19.
See How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others to learn how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19, if you decide to attend a funeral or visitation.
COVID-19 is a new disease and we are still learning how it spreads.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
This type of spread is not a concern after death.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
This is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
People should consider not touching the body of someone who has died of COVID-19.
Older people and people of all ages with severe underlying health conditions are at higher risk of severe illness from COVID-19.
There may be less of a chance of the virus spreading from certain types of touching, such as holding the hand or hugging after the body has been prepared for viewing.
Other activities, such as kissing, washing, and shrouding should be avoided before, during, and after the body has been prepared, if possible.
If washing the body or shrouding are important religious or cultural practices, families are encouraged to work with their communitys cultural and religious leaders and funeral home staff on how to reduce their exposure as much as possible.
At a minimum, people conducting these activities should wear disposable gloves.
If splashing of fluids is expected, additional personal protective equipment (PPE) may be required (such as disposable gown, face shield, or goggles and N-95 respirator).
If desired, you may retrieve the belongings of a loved one who has died of COVID-19 outside their home (for example, in a hospital setting).
Depending on local rules and regulations, family members may retrieve these belongings at the funeral home or the healthcare facility.
You should use gloves and practice good hand hygiene when handling your loved ones belongings.
Depending on the type of belongings, such as electronics, you should also follow the household item-specific cleaning and disinfection guidelines when handling these items.
When a US citizen dies outside the United States, the deceased persons next of kin or legal representative should notify US consular officials at the Department of State.
Consular personnel are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, to provide assistance to US citizens for overseas emergencies.
If a family member, domestic partner, or legal representative is in a different country from the deceased person, he or she should call the Department of States Office of Overseas Citizens Services in Washington, DC, from 8 am to 5 pm Eastern time, Monday through Friday, at 888-407-4747 (toll-free) or 202-501-4444.
For emergency assistance after working hours or on weekends and holidays, call the Department of State switchboard at 202-647-4000 and ask to speak with the Overseas Citizens Services duty officer.
In addition, the US embassyexternal iconexternal iconexternal icon closest to or in the country where the US citizen died can provide assistance.
CDC does not require an autopsy before the remains of a person who died overseas are returned to the United States.
Depending on the circumstances surrounding the death, some countries may require an autopsy.
Sources of support to the family include the local consulate or embassy, travel insurance provider, tour operator, faith-based and aid organizations, and the deceaseds employer.
There likely will need to be an official identification of the body and official documents issued by the consular office.
CDC requirements for importing human remains depend upon if the body has been embalmed, cremated, or if the person died from a quarantinable communicable disease.
At this time, COVID-19 is a quarantinable communicable disease in the United States and the remains must meet the standards for importation found in 42 Code of Federal Regulations Part 71.55 and may be cleared, released, and authorized for entry into the United States only under the following conditions:
Please see CDCs guidance for additional information.
Cleaning with soap and water removes germs, dirt, and impurities from surfaces.
It lowers the risk of spreading infection.
Disinfecting kills germs on surfaces.
By killing germs on a surface after cleaning, it can further lower the risk of spreading infection.
The risk of transmitting or spreading SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, during vacuuming is unknown.
In order to reduce the need for cleaning, disinfection, and vacuuming, consider removing area rugs completely, if possible.
At this time, there are no reported cases of COVID-19 associated with vacuuming.
If vacuuming is necessary or required in a school, business, or community facility that was used by a person with suspected or confirmed COVID-19, first follow the CDC recommendations for Cleaning and Disinfection for Community Facilities that apply, which includes a wait time of 24 hours, or as long as practical.
After cleaning and disinfection, the following recommendations may help reduce the risk to workers and other individuals when vacuuming:
Routine cleaning is the everyday cleaning practices that businesses and communities normally use to maintain a healthy environment.
Surfaces frequently touched by multiple people, such as door handles, bathroom surfaces, and handrails, should be cleaned with soap and water or another detergent at least daily when facilities are in use.
More frequent cleaning and disinfection may be required based on level of use.
For example, certain surfaces and objects in public spaces, such as shopping carts and point of sale keypads, should be cleaned and disinfected before each use.
Cleaning removes dirt and impurities, including germs, from surfaces.
Cleaning alone does not kill germs, but it reduces the number of germs on a surface.
Cleaning does not kill germs, but by removing them, it lowers their numbers and the risk of spreading infection.
If a surface may have gotten the virus on it from a person with or suspected to have COVID-19, the surface should be cleaned and disinfected.
Disinfecting kills germs on surfaces.
Regular cleaning staff can clean and disinfect community spaces.
Cleaning staff should be trained on appropriate use of cleaning and disinfection chemicals and provided with the personal protective equipment (PPE) required for the chemicals used.
Companies do not necessarily need to close after a person with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 has been in a company facility.
The area(s) used or visited by the ill person should be closed for 24 hours or as long as possible.
Open outside doors and windows as much as possible ensuring that doing so does not pose a safety risk to children using the facility (i.e.
make sure that children are not able to enter the closed off area through any windows or doors).
and use ventilating fans to increase air circulation in the area.
Once the area has been appropriately disinfected, it can be opened for use.
Workers without close contact with the person with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 can return to work immediately after disinfection is completed.
The efficacy of these disinfection methods against the virus that causes COVID-19 is not known.
EPA only recommends use of the surface disinfectants identified on List Nexternal icon against the virus that causes COVID-19.
EPA does not routinely review the safety or efficacy of pesticidal devices, such as UV lights, LED lights, or ultrasonic devices.
Therefore, EPA cannot confirm whether, or under what circumstances, such products might be effective against the spread of COVID-19.
Outdoor areas generally require normal routine cleaning and do not require disinfection.
Spraying disinfectant on outdoor playgrounds is not an efficient use of disinfectant supplies and has not been proven to reduce the risk of COVID-19 to the public.
You should maintain existing cleaning and hygiene practices for outdoor areas.
If practical, high touch surfaces made of plastic or metal, such as grab bars and railings, should be cleaned routinely.
Cleaning and disinfection of wooden surfaces (e.g play structures, benches, tables) or groundcovers (e.g mulch, sand) is not recommended.
CDC does not recommend the use of sanitizing tunnels.
There is no evidence that they are effective in reducing the spread of COVID-19.
Chemicals used in sanitizing tunnels could cause skin, eye, or respiratory irritation or damage.
CDC does not recommend disinfection of sidewalks or roads.
Spraying disinfectant on sidewalks and roads is not an efficient use of disinfectant supplies and has not been proven to reduce the risk of COVID-19 to the public.
The risk of spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 from these surfaces is very low and disinfection is not effective on these surfaces.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
See If You Have Pets for more information about pets and COVID-19.
However, since animals can spread other diseases to people, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, such as washing your hands and maintaining good hygiene.
For more information on the many benefits of pet ownership, as well as staying safe and healthy around animals including pets, livestock, and wildlife, visit CDCs Healthy Pets, Healthy People website.
Although we know certain bacteria and fungi can be carried on fur and hair, there is no evidence that viruses, including the virus that causes COVID-19, can spread to people from the skin, fur, or hair of pets.
However, because animals can sometimes carry other germs that can make people sick, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, including washing hands before and after interacting with them.
Dog parks provide socialization and exercise for dogs, which is an important part of their wellbeing.
Because there is a risk that people with COVID-19 could spread it to animals, CDC recommends that you do not let pets interact with people outside of your household, especially in places with community spread of COVID-19.
Therefore, you should consider avoiding dog parks or other places where large numbers of people and dogs gather.
Some areas are allowing dog parks to open.
If you choose to go to a dog park, follow local guidelines.
There are ways to reduce the risk of you or your dog getting infected with COVID-19 if you go to a dog park.
See more information on pets and COVID-19 and recommendations for how to help keep your pet safe.
Until we know more about how this virus affects animals, CDC encourages pet owners to treat pets as you would other human family members to protect them from possible infection.
This means limiting contact between your pets and people outside your household as much as possible and avoiding places where large numbers of people gather.
Some areas are allowing groomers and boarding facilities such as dog daycares to open.
If you must take your pet to a groomer or boarding facility, follow any protocols put into place at the facility, such as wearing a mask and maintaining at least 6 feet of space between yourself and others if possible.
Limit pet items brought from home to the groomer or boarding facility, and disinfect any objects that are taken into a facility and returned home (such as leashes, bowls, and toys).
Use an EPA-registered disinfectantexternal icon to clean items and rinse thoroughly with clean water afterwards.
Do not wipe or bathe your pet with chemical disinfectants, alcohol, hydrogen peroxide, or other products, such as hand sanitizer, counter-cleaning wipes, or other industrial or surface cleaners.
If you have questions about appropriate products for bathing or cleaning your pet, talk to your veterinarian.
Do not put masks on pets, and do not take a sick pet to a groomer or boarding facility.
Signs of sickness in dogs may include fever, coughing, difficulty breathing or shortness of breath, lethargy, sneezing, discharge from the nose or eyes, vomiting, or diarrhea.
If you think your pet is sick, call your veterinarian.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
See more information on pets and COVID-19 and recommendations for how to help keep your pet safe.
Most pets that have gotten sick from the virus that causes COVID-19 were infected after close contact with a person with COVID-19.
Talk to your veterinarian about any health concerns you have about your pets.
If your pet gets sick after contact with a person with COVID-19, call your veterinarian and let them know the pet was around a person with COVID-19.
If you are sick with COVID-19, do not take your pet to the veterinary clinic yourself.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
Routine testing of animals for COVID-19 is not recommended at this time.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
However, it appears that the virus that causes COVID-19 can spread from people to animals after close contact with people with COVID-19.
Until we learn more about how this virus affects animals, use similar precautions for pets and other animals in your facility as you would for other people in your facility.
This will help protect both people and pets in your facility from COVID-19.
Talk to a veterinarian if a pet in your facility gets sick or if you have any concerns about the health of any pets in the facility.
If you think a pet in the facility was exposed to or is showing signs consistent with COVID-19, contact your state health official to discuss guidance on testing pets or other animals for the virus that causes COVID-19.
People who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 should avoid providing care for sick pets, if possible.
For more information, visit CDCs If You Have Pets webpage.
CDC does not have any evidence to suggest that imported animals or animal products pose a risk for spreading COVID-19 in the United States.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
CDC, the U. S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) play distinct but complementary roles in regulating the importation of live animals and animal products into the United States.
Please refer to CDCs requirements for bringing a dog to the United States.
The current requirements for rabies vaccination apply to dogs imported from high-risk countries for rabies.
Imported animals will need to meet CDC and USDAsexternal iconexternal icon requirements for entering the United States.
At this time, there is no evidence that companion animals, including pets and service animals, can spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
As with any animal introduced to a new environment, animals recently imported should be observed daily for signs of illness.
If an animal becomes ill, the animal should be examined by a veterinarian.
Call your local veterinary clinic before bringing the animal into the clinic and let them know that the animal was recently imported from another country.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
Currently, there is no evidence to suggest the virus that causes COVID-19 is circulating in free-living wildlife in the United States, or that wildlife might be a source of infection for people in the United States.
If a wild animal were to become infected with the virus, we dont know whether the infection could then spread among wildlife or if it could spread to other animals, including pets.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals, including wildlife, could be affected by COVID-19.
Because wildlife can carry other diseases, even without looking sick, it is always important to enjoy wildlife from a distance.
Take steps to prevent getting sick from wildlife in the United States:
See COVID-19 and Animals for more information.
Other coronaviruses have been found in North American bats in the past, but there is currently no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 is present in any free-living wildlife in the United States, including bats.
In general, coronaviruses do not cause illness or death in bats, but we dont yet know if this new coronavirus would make North American species of bats sick.
Bats are an important part of natural ecosystems, and their populations are already declining in the United States.
Bat populations could be further threatened by the disease itself or by harm inflicted on bats resulting from a misconception that bats are spreading COVID-19.
However, there is no evidence that bats in the United States are a source of the virus that causes COVID-19 for people.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how bats could be affected by COVID-19.
Currently, there is no evidence that you can get infected with the virus that causes COVID-19 by eating food, including wild hunted game meat.
However, hunters can get infected with other diseases when processing or eating game.
Hunters should always practice good hygiene when processing animals by following these food safety recommendations:
You should follow your state and/or local jurisdictional guidance regarding continuing operations at your facility.
There have not been any reports of horses testing positive for the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
COVID-19 is primarily spread from person to person, so steps should be taken to reduce the risks for people visiting your facility.
For more information, see Guidance on Preparing Workplaces for COVID-19pdf iconexternal icon and Interim Guidance for Businesses and Employers to Plan and Respond to Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Community mitigation is especially important before a vaccine or drug becomes widely available.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
Individual people, communities, schools, businesses, and healthcare organizations have a role to play in community mitigation.
Policies*, which include limits on large gatherings, restrictions on businesses, and school closures are often needed to fully put in place community mitigation strategies.
Each community is unique.
Because some actions can be very disruptive to daily life, mitigation activities will be different depending on how much disease has spread within the community, what the community population is like, and the ability to take these actions at the local level.
To identify appropriate activities, all parts of a community that might be affected need to be considered, including populations most vulnerable to severe illness, and those who might be more affected socially or economically.
When selecting mitigation activities, states and communities need to consider the spread of disease locally, characteristics of the people who live in the community (for example, age groups, languages spoken, overall health status), and the kind of public health resources and healthcare systems (like hospitals) that are available in the community.
State and local officials may need to adjust community mitigation activities and immediately take steps to scale them up or down depending on the changing local situation.
Putting mitigation into practice is based on
*CDC cannot address the policies of any business or organization.
CDC shares recommendations based on the best available science to help people make decisions that improve their health and safety.
In all cases, follow the guidance of your healthcare provider and local health department.
Local decisions depend on local circumstances.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
Currently there is no evidence that people can get COVID-19 by eating or handling food.
It may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object, such as a food package or dining ware that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
There is also no current evidence that people can get COVID-19 by drinking water.
The COVID-19 virus has not been detected in drinking water.
Conventional water treatment methods that use filtration and disinfection, such as those in most municipal drinking water systems, should remove or kill the virus that causes COVID-19.​ Learn more about food and COVID-19.
The virus that causes COVID-19 has not been detected in treated drinking water.
Water treatment plants use filters and disinfectants to remove or kill germs, like the virus that causes COVID-19.
The Environmental Protection Agency regulates water treatment plants to ensure that treated water is safe to drink.
Currently, there is no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 can be spread to people by drinking treated water.
COVID-19 is spread mainly through close contact from person-to-person.
You can continue to use and drink water from your tap as usual.
The virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in the feces of some patients diagnosed with COVID-19.
However, it is unclear whether the virus found in feces may be capable of causing COVID-19.
There has not been any confirmed report of the virus spreading from feces to a person.
Scientists also do not know how much risk there is that the virus could be spread from the feces of an infected person to another person.
However, they think this risk is low based on data from previous outbreaks of diseases caused by related coronaviruses, such as severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS).
Recently, ribonucleic acid (RNA) from the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater, and no information to date that anyone has become sick with COVID-19 because of exposure to wastewater.
At this time, the risk of transmission of the virus that causes COVID-19 through properly designed and maintained sewerage systems is thought to be low.
Recently, ribonucleic acid (RNA) from the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater, and no information to date that anyone has become sick with COVID-19 because of exposure to wastewater.
Standard practices associated with wastewater treatment plant operations should be sufficient to protect wastewater workers from the virus that causes COVID-19.
These standard practices can include engineering and administrative controls, hygiene precautions, specific safe work practices, and personal protective equipment (PPE) normally required when handling untreated wastewater.
No additional COVID-19–specific protections are recommended for workers involved in wastewater management, including those at wastewater treatment facilities.
See Information for Wastewater and Sanitation System Workers on COVID-19 for additional information.
In most cases, it is safe to wash your hands with soap and tap water during a Boil Water Advisory.
Follow the guidance from your local public health officials.
If soap and water are not available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in pools, hot tubs, or water playgrounds.
Plus, proper operation of public pools, hot tubs, and water playgrounds (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) and disinfection of the water (with chlorine or bromine) should inactivate the virus.
The virus mainly spreads when respiratory droplets from infected people land in the mouths or noses of others or possibly when inhaled into the lungs by others.
If a public pool, hot tub, or water playground is open, it is important for all visitors and staff to take steps to slow the spread of the virus:
See Considerations for Public Pools, Hot Tubs, and Water Playgrounds for more information.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in pools, including saltwater pools.
Plus, proper operation of public pools (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) and disinfection of the water (with chlorine or bromine) should inactivate the virus.
Saltwater pools are chlorinated pools.
In traditional pools, chlorine products (such as granules or liquid bleach) are added to the water to disinfect it.
In saltwater pools, table salt (made up of sodium and chloride) is added to the water, and an electrical current is then run through the water with dissolved salt.
This creates the same disinfecting form of chlorine that is created when chlorine products are added to the water in traditional pools.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in lakes, oceans, rivers, or other natural bodies of water.
The virus mainly spreads when respiratory droplets from infected people land in the mouths or noses of others or possibly when inhaled into the lungs by others.
If a public beach or other swim area in a natural body of water is open, it is important for all visitors and staff to take steps to slow the spread of the virus:
See Considerations for Public Beaches for more information.
RNAexternal icon of the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater, which can come from combined sewer overflowsexternal icon (rainwater runoff, domestic sewage, and industrial wastewater) and other sourcesexternal icon (such as, leaking septic tanks or animal waste from farms nearby) and enter swim areas.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater.
Plus, CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus being spread by swallowing or coming in contact with water contaminated by feces (poop) from an infected person.
At lakes, oceans, and rivers with routine water quality monitoring programs, staff look for changes in fecal (poop) contamination of the water.
Water quality advisories and beach closures alert the public to avoid getting in or on the water because of increased fecal contamination.
Learn more about healthy swimming in natural bodies of water and access water quality information by state.
No, do NOT wear a cloth mask in the water.
It can be difficult to breathe through a cloth mask when it is wet.
Plus, wet cloth masks dont slow the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19 as well as dry cloth masks.
All of this means it is particularly important to stay at least 6 feet apart in the water from people you dont live with.
In case cloth masks do get wet by mistake, bring a second (or extra) cloth mask for everyone heading out to the public pool or beach.
CDC does not yet have evidence on the effectiveness of different types of cloth materials.
Wearing cloth masks can help prevent people infected with the virus that causes COVID-19 from spreading the virus.
Make sure your cloth mask:
Cloth masks should NOT be worn by children less than 2 years old or anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Learn more about how to wear, take off, and wash your cloth masks.
The design of the public pool, hot tub, or water playground and surrounding deck and if visitors live together or not will affect how many people can stay at least 6 feet apart from those they dont live with.
CDC recommends operators of public pools, hot tubs, and water playgrounds:
Operators might want to limit the number of people in and around the water so if the water needs to be evacuated (because of lightning or other health or safety threat) social distancing can be maintained on the deck.
Otherwise, if the water is evacuated and social distancing cannot be maintained on the deck, close the deck to visitors.
There is no standard formula to determine how many people can maintain social distancing in the water and on the surrounding deck.
See Considerations for Public Pools, Hot Tubs, and Water Playgrounds for more information.
No.
Only List N disinfectants approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agencyexternal icon should be used to disinfect surfaces (such as handrails and in bathrooms) and shared objects (such as kickboards and pool noodles).
The list includes hundreds of disinfectants.
Operators of public pools, hot tubs, or water playgrounds (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) should consult with the design company or engineer to determine which disinfectants are best suited for surfaces and with manufacturers to determine which disinfectants are best suited for shared objects.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectants.
We dont know yet.
Early scientific data suggest that SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, can be inactivated by the suns UV light.
However, the ability of the suns UV light to inactivate the virus on surfaces (such as handrails and in bathrooms) and shared objects (such as kickboards and pool noodles) needs more research.
Factors — such as cloudiness, latitude (distance from equator), time of day, and amount of time exposed to the suns UV light — will determine how effectively the virus is inactivated.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectantsexternal icon.
The more frequently a surface is touched by multiple people, the more frequently it should be cleaned and then disinfected with a List N disinfectant approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agencyexternal icon.
Frequently touched surfaces should be cleaned and disinfected at least daily.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectants.
No.
RNAexternal icon of the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in feces (poop).
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in feces.
Plus, CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus being spread by swallowing or coming in contact with water contaminated by feces from an infected person.
As a result, CDC has not changed its fecal incident response recommendations.
Remember, do NOT vacuum feces out of the water.
Not when lifeguards are actively lifeguarding.
Lifeguards actively lifeguarding should not be doing other tasks that could distract them.
Drowning deaths have resulted, at least in part, from lifeguards being distracted.
Drowning can occur quickly and quietly.
Learn and take steps to prevent drowning.
Lifeguard trainers can consider the following steps to slow the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19:
CDC has more COVID-19–related considerations for public pools and public beaches and non-COVID-19–related healthy and safe swimming resources.
Help control the spread of rumors and be aware of fraud schemes.
1Fever may be subjective or confirmed
2Close contact is defined as—
a) being within approximately 6 feet (2 meters) of a COVID-19 case for a prolonged period of time; close contact can occur while caring for, living with, visiting, or sharing a health care waiting area or room with a COVID-19 case
b) having direct contact with infectious secretions of a COVID-19 case (e.g being coughed on)
If such contact occurs while not wearing recommended personal protective equipment or PPE (e.g gowns, gloves, NIOSH-certified disposable N95 respirator, eye protection), criteria for PUI consideration are met
See CDCs updated Interim Healthcare Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Persons Under Investigation for 2019 Novel Coronavirus.
Data to inform the definition of close contact are limited.
Considerations when assessing close contact include the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk) and the clinical symptoms of the person with COVID-19 (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk as does exposure to a severely ill patient).
Special consideration should be given to those exposed in health care settings.
A novel coronavirus is a new coronavirus that has not been previously identified.
The virus causing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), is not the same as the coronaviruses that commonly circulate among humans and cause mild illness, like the common cold.
On February 11, 2020 the World Health Organization announced an official name for the disease that is causing the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak, first identified in Wuhan China.
The new name of this disease is coronavirus disease 2019, abbreviated as COVID-19.
In COVID-19, ‘CO stands for ‘corona, ‘VI for ‘virus, and ‘D for disease.
Formerly, this disease was referred to as 2019 novel coronavirus or 2019-nCoV.
There are many types of human coronaviruses including some that commonly cause mild upper-respiratory tract illnesses.
COVID-19 is a new disease, caused by a novel (or new) coronavirus that has not previously been seen in humans.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person to person, mainly through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
Spread is more likely when people are in close contact with one another (within about 6 feet).
COVID-19 seems to be spreading easily and sustainably in the community (community spread) in many affected geographic areas.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
It is not yet known whether weather and temperature affect the spread of COVID-19.
Some other viruses, like those that cause the common cold and flu, spread more during cold weather months but that does not mean it is impossible to become sick with these viruses during other months.
There is much more to learn about the transmissibility, severity, and other features associated with COVID-19 and investigations are ongoing.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Each health department determines community spread differently based on local conditions.
For information on community spread in your area, please visit your health departments website.​
At this time, CDC has no data to suggest that this new coronavirus or other similar coronaviruses are spread by mosquitoes or ticks.
The main way that COVID-19 spreads is from person to person.
See How Coronavirus Spreads for more information.
Visit the How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others page to learn about how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19.
Wear masks in public settings when around people not living in your household and particularly where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, such as grocery stores, pharmacies, and gas stations.
Masks may slow the spread of the virus and help people who may have the virus and do not know it from transmitting it to others.
COVID-19 can be spread by people who do not have symptoms and do not know that they are infected.
Thats why its important for everyone to practice social distancing (staying at least 6 feet away from other people) and wear masks in public settings.
Masks provide an extra layer to help prevent the respiratory droplets from traveling in the air and onto other people.
The masks recommended are not surgical masks or N-95 respirators.
Those are critical supplies that must continue to be reserved for healthcare workers and other medical first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
More information about masks can be found on our masks site.
For more information, see Groups at Higher Risk for Severe Illness.
There is still a lot that is unknown about COVID-19 and how it spreads.
Coronaviruses are thought to be spread most often by respiratory droplets.
Although the virus can survive for a short period on some surfaces, it is unlikely to be spread from domestic or international mail, products or packaging.
However, it may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Learn more about safe handling of deliveries and mail.
In healthcare settings across the United States, donated blood is a lifesaving, essential part of caring for patients.
The need for donated blood is constant, and blood centers are open and in urgent need of donations.
CDC encourages people who are well to continue to donate blood if they are able, even if they are practicing social distancing because of COVID-19.
CDC is supporting blood centers by providing recommendations that will keep donors and staff safe.
Examples of these recommendations include spacing donor chairs 6 feet apart, thoroughly adhering to environmental cleaning practices, and encouraging donors to make donation appointments ahead of time.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Handwashing is one of the best ways to protect yourself and your family from getting sick.
Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing; going to the bathroom; and before eating or preparing food.
If soap and water are not readily available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces such as tables, doorknobs, light switches, countertops, handles, desks, phones, keyboards, toilets, faucets, and sinks.
If surfaces are dirty, clean them using detergent or soap and water prior to disinfection.
To disinfect, most common EPA-registered household disinfectants will work.
See CDCs recommendations for household cleaning and disinfection.
Most people who get COVID-19 will be able to recover at home.
CDC has directions for people who are recovering at home and their caregivers, including:
However, some people may need emergency medical attention.
Watch for symptoms and learn when to seek emergency medical attention.
When to Seek Emergency Medical Attention
Look for emergency warning signs* for COVID-19.
If someone is showing any of these signs, seek emergency medical care immediately
*This list is not all possible symptoms.
Please call your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 or call ahead to your local emergency facility: Notify the operator that you are seeking care for someone who has or may have COVID-19.
Based on available evidence, children do not appear to be at higher risk for COVID-19 than adults.
While some children and infants have been sick with COVID-19, adults make up most of the known cases to date.
However, a few children have developed multisystem inflammatory syndrome (MIS-C).
Currently, information about this syndrome is limited.
CDC is working with state and local health departments to learn more about MIS-C.
You can encourage your child to help stop the spread of COVID-19 by teaching them to do the same things everyone should do to stay healthy.
You can find additional information on preventing COVID-19 at How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others.
More information on Keeping Children Healthy during the COVID-19 Outbreak is available online.
No.
The symptoms of COVID-19 are similar in children and adults.
COVID-19 can look different in different people.
For many people, being sick with COVID-19 would be a little bit like having the flu.
People can get a fever, cough, or have a hard time taking deep breaths.
Most people who have gotten COVID-19 have not gotten very sick.
Only a small group of people who get it have had more serious problems.
CDC and partners are investigating cases of multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) associated with COVID-19.
Learn more about COVID-19 and multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C).
CDC recommends that everyone 2 years and older wear a mask that covers their nose and mouth in public settings when around people not living in your household, particularly where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain.
Masks should NOT be put on babies or children younger than 2 because of the danger of suffocation.
Children younger than 2 years of age are listed as an exception as well as anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Outbreaks can be stressful for adults and children.
When you talk with your child, try to stay calm, and reassure them that they are safe.
Talk to your children about COVID-19 and help them cope with stress.
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) is a condition where different body parts can become inflamed, including the heart, lungs, kidneys, brain, skin, eyes, or gastrointestinal organs.
We do not yet know what causes MIS-C.
However, we know that many children with MIS-C had the virus that causes COVID-19, or had been around someone with COVID-19.
MIS-C can be serious, even deadly, but most children who were diagnosed with this condition have gotten better with medical care.
Contact your childs doctor, nurse, or clinic right away if your child is showing symptoms of MIS-C. Seek emergency care right away if your child is showing any of these emergency warning signs of MIS-C or other concerning signs.
The key to slowing the spread of COVID-19 is to practice social distancing.
While school is out, children should not have in-person playdates with children from other households.
If children are playing outside their own homes, it is essential that they remain 6 feet from anyone who is not in their own household.
Some children with certain underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Make sure children practice everyday preventive behaviors, such as washing their hands often with soap and water.
Remember, if children meet outside of school in groups, it can put everyone at risk.
For more information, see Help Stop the Spread of COVID-19 in Children.
For more information, see Help Children Learn at Home.
Check with your school on plans to continue meal services during the school dismissal.
Many schools are keeping school facilities open to allow families to pick up meals or are providing grab-and-go meals at a central location.
For more information, see Keep Children Healthy during the COVID-19 Outbreak.
Older adults and people who have serious underlying medical conditions are at highest risk of getting sick from COVID-19.
Its not known yet whether all children with underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Although most COVID-19 cases in children are not severe, serious illness that needs to be treated at the hospital still happens.
Some data on children reported that the majority who needed hospitalization for COVID-19 had at least one underlying medical condition.
The most common underlying conditions reported among children with COVID-19 include chronic lung disease (including asthma), heart disease, and conditions that weaken the immune system.
This information suggests that children with these underlying medical conditions may be at risk for more severe illness from COVID-19.
More data are needed to learn which underlying or complex medical conditions may put children at increased risk.
CDC is monitoring new information as it becomes available and will provide updates as needed.
Learn more about caring for children with special health care needs during a disaster and people who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
In addition to following the recommendations to prevent getting sick and running essential errands, families should take extra steps recommended for persons with higher risk of severe COVID-19 illness and steps outlined for those with potential COVID-19 exposure or confirmed illness.
Helping children understand and follow recommendations, like social distancing and wearing masks, can be challenging if your child has intellectual disabilities, sensory issues, or other special healthcare needs.
Supporting children with special healthcare needs can put additional demands and stress on families, especially during emergency situations.
You have likely found ways to manage the stress and challenges unique to your familys situation.
It is important to continue your familys coping methods, including reaching out to other family members, friends, support groups, and organizations that have been helpful in the past.
See information on helping children cope and coping with stress (such as visiting parks, trails, or open spaces) and making your family stronger.
If you, or someone you care about, are feeling overwhelmed with emotions like sadness, depression, or anxiety, or feel like you want to harm yourself or others:
If your child with special healthcare needs becomes sick with symptoms of COVID-19, contact your childs healthcare provider.
If your child has new or worsening emergency warning signs, such as trouble breathing, pain or pressure in the chest, confusion or inability to wake them up, or bluish lips or face, call 911.
If you think your child may have COVID-19, notify the operator so that first responders may be appropriately prepared to protect themselves and others.
Notify your childs healthcare provider if someone else in your house becomes sick with COVID-19, so they can provide any advice specific for your child.
See additional information if someone in the home is sick with COVID-19 or suspected of having COVID-19.
If your childs healthcare provider tells you to go to the hospital for any health problem, including COVID-19
Create a household plan of action to help protect your health and the health of those you care about in the event of an outbreak of COVID-19 in your community:
Plan for potential changes at your workplace.
Talk to your employer about their emergency operations plan, including sick-leave policies and telework options.
Learn how businesses and employers can plan for and respond to COVID-19.
CDC does not encourage the production and use of homemade hand sanitizer products because of concerns over the correct use of the ingredientsexternal icon and the need to work under sterile conditions to make the product.
Local industries that are looking into producing hand sanitizer to fill in for commercial shortages can refer to the World Health Organization guidance.pdf iconexternal icon Organizations should revert to the use of commercially produced, FDA-approved product once such supplies again become available.
People with COVID-19 have reported a wide range of symptoms – from mild symptoms to severe illness.
Symptoms may appear 2-14 days after exposure to the virus.
If you have fever, cough, or other symptoms, you might have COVID-19.
Look for emergency warning signs* for COVID-19.
If someone is showing any of these signs, seek emergency medical care immediately
*This list is not all possible symptoms.
Please call your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 or call ahead to your local emergency facility: Notify the operator that you are seeking care for someone who has or may have COVID-19.
Yes.
It is possible to test positive for flu (as well as other respiratory infections) and COVID-19 at the same time.
Maybe; not everyone needs to be tested for COVID-19.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and want to get tested, call your healthcare provider first.
Most people will have mild illness and can recover at home without medical care and may not need to be tested.
CDC has guidance for who should be tested, but decisions about testing are made by state and local health departments and healthcare providers.
You can also visit your state or local health departments website to look for the latest local information on testing.
Decisions about testing are made by state and localexternal icon health departments or healthcare providers.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and are not tested, it is important to stay home.
What to do if you are sick.
COVID-19 testing differs by location.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and want to get tested, call your healthcare provider first.
You can also visit your state or localexternal icon health departments website to look for the latest local information on testing.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized viral tests that let you collect either a nasal swabexternal icon or a saliva sampleexternal icon at home.
However, you will still need to send your sample to a laboratory for analysis.
If you test positive for COVID-19, know what protective steps to take if you are sick or caring for someone.
If you test negative for COVID-19, you probably were not infected at the time your sample was collected.
However, that does not mean you will not get sick.
The test result only means that you did not have COVID-19 at the time of testing.
You might test negative if the sample was collected early in your infection and test positive later during your illness.
You could also be exposed to COVID-19 after the test and get infected then.
This means you could still spread the virus.
If you develop symptoms later, you might need another test to determine if you are infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.
For more information about viral tests, please visit Test for Current Infection.
Antibody tests for COVID-19 are available through healthcare providers and laboratories.
Check with your healthcare provider to see if they offer antibody tests and whether you should get one.
A positive test result shows you might have antibodies from an infection with the virus that causes COVID-19.
However, there is a chance a positive result means that you have antibodies from an infection with a virus from the same family of viruses (called coronaviruses), such as the one that causes the common cold.
Having antibodies to the virus that causes COVID-19 might provide protection from getting infected with the virus again.
If it does, we do not know how much protection the antibodies might provide or how long this protection might last.
You should continue to protect yourself and others since you could get infected with the virus again.
If you test negative, you might not have ever had COVID-19.
Talk with your healthcare provider about your test result and the type of test you took to understand what your result means.
Regardless of whether you test positive or negative, the results do not confirm whether or not you are able to spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
Until we know more, continue to take steps to protect yourself and others.
If you want more information about antibody tests, see Test for Past Infection.
Yes, it is possible.
You may test negative if the sample was collected early in your infection and test positive later during this illness.
You could also be exposed to COVID-19 after the test and get infected then.
Even if you test negative, you still should take steps to protect yourself and others.
See Testing for Current Infection for more information.
COVID-19 is a new disease and there is limited information regarding risk factors for severe disease.
Based on currently available information and clinical expertise, older adults and people with underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
If you are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19, you should:
Most people with disabilities are not inherently at higher risk for becoming infected with or having severe illness from COVID-19.
Some people with physical limitations or other disabilities might be at a higher risk of infection because of their underlying medical condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Contact tracing has been used for decades by state and local health departments to slow or stop the spread of infectious diseases.
Contact tracing slows the spread of COVID-19 by
During contact tracing, the health department staff will not ask you for
Discussions with health department staff are confidential.
This means that your personal and medical information will be kept private and only shared with those who may need to know, like your health care provider.
If you have been diagnosed with COVID-19, your name will not be shared with those you came in contact with.
The health department will only notify people you were in close contact with (within 6 feet for more than 15 minutes) that they might have been exposed to COVID-19.
Each state and jurisdiction use their own method for collecting and protecting health information.
To learn more, contact your state or local health department.
You may also be interested in: If I participate contact tracing for COVID-19 using a digital tool, is my personal health information secure?
For COVID-19, a close contact is anyone who was within 6 feet of an infected person for at least 15 minutes.
An infected person can spread COVID-19 starting 48 hours (or 2 days) before the person had any symptoms or tested positive for COVID-19.
Yes, you are still considered a close contact even if you were wearing a mask while you were around someone with COVID-19.
Masks are meant to protect other people in case you are infected, and not to protect you from becoming infected.
If you have been around someone who is sick with COVID-19, local authorities, the health department, or your doctor may recommend that you get tested for COVID-19.
The health department may be able to provide resources for testing in your area.
If you are diagnosed with COVID-19, someone from the health department may call you to check on your health, discuss who you have been around, and ask where you spent time while you may have been able to spread COVID-19 to others.
You will also be asked to continue to stay at home and self-isolate, away from others.
Watch for or monitor your symptoms of COVID-19.
If your symptoms worsen or become severe, you should seek medical care.
If you were around someone who has been diagnosed with COVID-19, someone from the health department may call you to let you know that you may have been exposed to COVID-19.
Stay home away from others for 14 days (self-quarantine) after your last contact with that person.
Health department staff will help identify the dates for your self-quarantine.
Health department staff can also provide resources for COVID-19 testing in your area.
Monitor your health and watch for symptoms of COVID-19.
Remember, symptoms may appear 2-14 days after you were exposed to COVID-19.
Tell the health department if you develop any symptoms.
Tell people you were around recently if you become ill, so they can monitor their health.
If your symptoms worsen or become severe, seek medical care.
Severe symptoms include trouble breathing, persistent pain or pressure in the chest, new confusion, inability to wake or stay awake, or bluish lips or face.
The health department staff will not ask you for
Yes.
You should still self-quarantine for 14 days since your last exposure.
It can take up to 14 days after exposure to the virus for a person to develop COVID-19 symptoms.
A negative result before end of the 14-day quarantine period does not rule out possible infection.
By self-quarantining for 14 days, you lower the chance of possibly exposing others to COVID-19.
People with COVID-19 can still spread the virus even if they dont have any symptoms.
If you were around someone who had COVID-19, it is critical that you stay home and away from others for 14 days from the last day that you were around that person.
Staying home and away from others at all times helps your health department in the fight against COVID-19 and helps protect you, your family, and your community.
If you have been around someone who was identified as a close contact to a person with COVID-19, closely monitor yourself for any symptoms of COVID-19.
You do not need to self-quarantine unless you develop symptoms or if the person identified as a close contact develops COVID-19.
No, there will not be a national app for contact tracing.
There are many options available now, and it is up to each state and individual to decide which tools best fit their needs.
Yes, if you agree to participate in contact tracing for COVID-19 with the health department, your information is secure.
Discussions with health department staff are confidential.
This means that your personal and medical information will be kept private and only shared with those who may need to know, like your health care provider.
Your name will not be shared with those you came in contact with.
If you have been diagnosed with COVID-19, the health department will only notify people you were in close contact with (within 6 feet for more than 15 minutes) that they might have been exposed to COVID-19.
Health departments may use case management tools to help make the contact tracing process more efficient.
If you choose to provide information through one of these tools, your information is secure and stored with the health department.
These tools also help health departments quickly receive and analyze information about COVID-19.
Case management tools are under the same laws and regulations for all sensitive health information use (e.g.
HIPPA).
You must provide consent for the health department to collect information using a case management tool.
Just like traditional contact tracing, digital tools will not collect information regarding money, Social Security numbers, bank account information, salary information, or credit card numbers.
Exposure notification tools may be an app that you can download on your personal cell phone.
If you choose to download an exposure notification app for COVID-19, your information is secure.
Exposure notification apps are developed in collaboration with or endorsed by health departments.
These apps undergo rigorous testing to determine their trustworthiness, security, and ability to protect peoples privacy.
Until you give consent to share information with your local health department, any information you have entered into the app is stored only on your personal phone.
Your information is stored only on your own phone and is not sent to the health department or any other third party.
The app and your information can be deleted any time.
When you consent to share your information with the local health department, your information is secure.
No, you are not required to download an app to give information for contact tracing for COVID-19.
Health departments commonly use case management tools to make the contact tracing process more efficient.
These types of tools are not downloaded on personal cell phones.
If you choose to give information to your local or state health department for contact tracing for COVID-19, you do not need to download an app on your cell phone.
The health department staff may call you to
It is up to you to decide if you download an exposure notification app for COVID-19.
There is currently no known risk associated with being in the same room at a funeral or visitation service with the body of someone who died of COVID-19.
See How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others to learn how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19, if you decide to attend a funeral or visitation.
COVID-19 is a new disease and we are still learning how it spreads.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
This type of spread is not a concern after death.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
This is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
People should consider not touching the body of someone who has died of COVID-19.
Older people and people of all ages with severe underlying health conditions are at higher risk of severe illness from COVID-19.
There may be less of a chance of the virus spreading from certain types of touching, such as holding the hand or hugging after the body has been prepared for viewing.
Other activities, such as kissing, washing, and shrouding should be avoided before, during, and after the body has been prepared, if possible.
If washing the body or shrouding are important religious or cultural practices, families are encouraged to work with their communitys cultural and religious leaders and funeral home staff on how to reduce their exposure as much as possible.
At a minimum, people conducting these activities should wear disposable gloves.
If splashing of fluids is expected, additional personal protective equipment (PPE) may be required (such as disposable gown, face shield, or goggles and N-95 respirator).
If desired, you may retrieve the belongings of a loved one who has died of COVID-19 outside their home (for example, in a hospital setting).
Depending on local rules and regulations, family members may retrieve these belongings at the funeral home or the healthcare facility.
You should use gloves and practice good hand hygiene when handling your loved ones belongings.
Depending on the type of belongings, such as electronics, you should also follow the household item-specific cleaning and disinfection guidelines when handling these items.
When a US citizen dies outside the United States, the deceased persons next of kin or legal representative should notify US consular officials at the Department of State.
Consular personnel are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, to provide assistance to US citizens for overseas emergencies.
If a family member, domestic partner, or legal representative is in a different country from the deceased person, he or she should call the Department of States Office of Overseas Citizens Services in Washington, DC, from 8 am to 5 pm Eastern time, Monday through Friday, at 888-407-4747 (toll-free) or 202-501-4444.
For emergency assistance after working hours or on weekends and holidays, call the Department of State switchboard at 202-647-4000 and ask to speak with the Overseas Citizens Services duty officer.
In addition, the US embassyexternal iconexternal iconexternal icon closest to or in the country where the US citizen died can provide assistance.
CDC does not require an autopsy before the remains of a person who died overseas are returned to the United States.
Depending on the circumstances surrounding the death, some countries may require an autopsy.
Sources of support to the family include the local consulate or embassy, travel insurance provider, tour operator, faith-based and aid organizations, and the deceaseds employer.
There likely will need to be an official identification of the body and official documents issued by the consular office.
CDC requirements for importing human remains depend upon if the body has been embalmed, cremated, or if the person died from a quarantinable communicable disease.
At this time, COVID-19 is a quarantinable communicable disease in the United States and the remains must meet the standards for importation found in 42 Code of Federal Regulations Part 71.55 and may be cleared, released, and authorized for entry into the United States only under the following conditions:
Please see CDCs guidance for additional information.
Cleaning with soap and water removes germs, dirt, and impurities from surfaces.
It lowers the risk of spreading infection.
Disinfecting kills germs on surfaces.
By killing germs on a surface after cleaning, it can further lower the risk of spreading infection.
The risk of transmitting or spreading SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, during vacuuming is unknown.
In order to reduce the need for cleaning, disinfection, and vacuuming, consider removing area rugs completely, if possible.
At this time, there are no reported cases of COVID-19 associated with vacuuming.
If vacuuming is necessary or required in a school, business, or community facility that was used by a person with suspected or confirmed COVID-19, first follow the CDC recommendations for Cleaning and Disinfection for Community Facilities that apply, which includes a wait time of 24 hours, or as long as practical.
After cleaning and disinfection, the following recommendations may help reduce the risk to workers and other individuals when vacuuming:
Routine cleaning is the everyday cleaning practices that businesses and communities normally use to maintain a healthy environment.
Surfaces frequently touched by multiple people, such as door handles, bathroom surfaces, and handrails, should be cleaned with soap and water or another detergent at least daily when facilities are in use.
More frequent cleaning and disinfection may be required based on level of use.
For example, certain surfaces and objects in public spaces, such as shopping carts and point of sale keypads, should be cleaned and disinfected before each use.
Cleaning removes dirt and impurities, including germs, from surfaces.
Cleaning alone does not kill germs, but it reduces the number of germs on a surface.
Cleaning does not kill germs, but by removing them, it lowers their numbers and the risk of spreading infection.
If a surface may have gotten the virus on it from a person with or suspected to have COVID-19, the surface should be cleaned and disinfected.
Disinfecting kills germs on surfaces.
Regular cleaning staff can clean and disinfect community spaces.
Cleaning staff should be trained on appropriate use of cleaning and disinfection chemicals and provided with the personal protective equipment (PPE) required for the chemicals used.
Companies do not necessarily need to close after a person with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 has been in a company facility.
The area(s) used or visited by the ill person should be closed for 24 hours or as long as possible.
Open outside doors and windows as much as possible ensuring that doing so does not pose a safety risk to children using the facility (i.e.
make sure that children are not able to enter the closed off area through any windows or doors).
and use ventilating fans to increase air circulation in the area.
Once the area has been appropriately disinfected, it can be opened for use.
Workers without close contact with the person with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 can return to work immediately after disinfection is completed.
The efficacy of these disinfection methods against the virus that causes COVID-19 is not known.
EPA only recommends use of the surface disinfectants identified on List Nexternal icon against the virus that causes COVID-19.
EPA does not routinely review the safety or efficacy of pesticidal devices, such as UV lights, LED lights, or ultrasonic devices.
Therefore, EPA cannot confirm whether, or under what circumstances, such products might be effective against the spread of COVID-19.
Outdoor areas generally require normal routine cleaning and do not require disinfection.
Spraying disinfectant on outdoor playgrounds is not an efficient use of disinfectant supplies and has not been proven to reduce the risk of COVID-19 to the public.
You should maintain existing cleaning and hygiene practices for outdoor areas.
If practical, high touch surfaces made of plastic or metal, such as grab bars and railings, should be cleaned routinely.
Cleaning and disinfection of wooden surfaces (e.g play structures, benches, tables) or groundcovers (e.g mulch, sand) is not recommended.
CDC does not recommend the use of sanitizing tunnels.
There is no evidence that they are effective in reducing the spread of COVID-19.
Chemicals used in sanitizing tunnels could cause skin, eye, or respiratory irritation or damage.
CDC does not recommend disinfection of sidewalks or roads.
Spraying disinfectant on sidewalks and roads is not an efficient use of disinfectant supplies and has not been proven to reduce the risk of COVID-19 to the public.
The risk of spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 from these surfaces is very low and disinfection is not effective on these surfaces.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
See If You Have Pets for more information about pets and COVID-19.
However, since animals can spread other diseases to people, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, such as washing your hands and maintaining good hygiene.
For more information on the many benefits of pet ownership, as well as staying safe and healthy around animals including pets, livestock, and wildlife, visit CDCs Healthy Pets, Healthy People website.
Although we know certain bacteria and fungi can be carried on fur and hair, there is no evidence that viruses, including the virus that causes COVID-19, can spread to people from the skin, fur, or hair of pets.
However, because animals can sometimes carry other germs that can make people sick, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, including washing hands before and after interacting with them.
Dog parks provide socialization and exercise for dogs, which is an important part of their wellbeing.
Because there is a risk that people with COVID-19 could spread it to animals, CDC recommends that you do not let pets interact with people outside of your household, especially in places with community spread of COVID-19.
Therefore, you should consider avoiding dog parks or other places where large numbers of people and dogs gather.
Some areas are allowing dog parks to open.
If you choose to go to a dog park, follow local guidelines.
There are ways to reduce the risk of you or your dog getting infected with COVID-19 if you go to a dog park.
See more information on pets and COVID-19 and recommendations for how to help keep your pet safe.
Until we know more about how this virus affects animals, CDC encourages pet owners to treat pets as you would other human family members to protect them from possible infection.
This means limiting contact between your pets and people outside your household as much as possible and avoiding places where large numbers of people gather.
Some areas are allowing groomers and boarding facilities such as dog daycares to open.
If you must take your pet to a groomer or boarding facility, follow any protocols put into place at the facility, such as wearing a mask and maintaining at least 6 feet of space between yourself and others if possible.
Limit pet items brought from home to the groomer or boarding facility, and disinfect any objects that are taken into a facility and returned home (such as leashes, bowls, and toys).
Use an EPA-registered disinfectantexternal icon to clean items and rinse thoroughly with clean water afterwards.
Do not wipe or bathe your pet with chemical disinfectants, alcohol, hydrogen peroxide, or other products, such as hand sanitizer, counter-cleaning wipes, or other industrial or surface cleaners.
If you have questions about appropriate products for bathing or cleaning your pet, talk to your veterinarian.
Do not put masks on pets, and do not take a sick pet to a groomer or boarding facility.
Signs of sickness in dogs may include fever, coughing, difficulty breathing or shortness of breath, lethargy, sneezing, discharge from the nose or eyes, vomiting, or diarrhea.
If you think your pet is sick, call your veterinarian.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
See more information on pets and COVID-19 and recommendations for how to help keep your pet safe.
Most pets that have gotten sick from the virus that causes COVID-19 were infected after close contact with a person with COVID-19.
Talk to your veterinarian about any health concerns you have about your pets.
If your pet gets sick after contact with a person with COVID-19, call your veterinarian and let them know the pet was around a person with COVID-19.
If you are sick with COVID-19, do not take your pet to the veterinary clinic yourself.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
Routine testing of animals for COVID-19 is not recommended at this time.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
However, it appears that the virus that causes COVID-19 can spread from people to animals after close contact with people with COVID-19.
Until we learn more about how this virus affects animals, use similar precautions for pets and other animals in your facility as you would for other people in your facility.
This will help protect both people and pets in your facility from COVID-19.
Talk to a veterinarian if a pet in your facility gets sick or if you have any concerns about the health of any pets in the facility.
If you think a pet in the facility was exposed to or is showing signs consistent with COVID-19, contact your state health official to discuss guidance on testing pets or other animals for the virus that causes COVID-19.
People who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 should avoid providing care for sick pets, if possible.
For more information, visit CDCs If You Have Pets webpage.
CDC does not have any evidence to suggest that imported animals or animal products pose a risk for spreading COVID-19 in the United States.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
CDC, the U. S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) play distinct but complementary roles in regulating the importation of live animals and animal products into the United States.
Please refer to CDCs requirements for bringing a dog to the United States.
The current requirements for rabies vaccination apply to dogs imported from high-risk countries for rabies.
Imported animals will need to meet CDC and USDAsexternal iconexternal icon requirements for entering the United States.
At this time, there is no evidence that companion animals, including pets and service animals, can spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
As with any animal introduced to a new environment, animals recently imported should be observed daily for signs of illness.
If an animal becomes ill, the animal should be examined by a veterinarian.
Call your local veterinary clinic before bringing the animal into the clinic and let them know that the animal was recently imported from another country.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
Currently, there is no evidence to suggest the virus that causes COVID-19 is circulating in free-living wildlife in the United States, or that wildlife might be a source of infection for people in the United States.
If a wild animal were to become infected with the virus, we dont know whether the infection could then spread among wildlife or if it could spread to other animals, including pets.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals, including wildlife, could be affected by COVID-19.
Because wildlife can carry other diseases, even without looking sick, it is always important to enjoy wildlife from a distance.
Take steps to prevent getting sick from wildlife in the United States:
See COVID-19 and Animals for more information.
Other coronaviruses have been found in North American bats in the past, but there is currently no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 is present in any free-living wildlife in the United States, including bats.
In general, coronaviruses do not cause illness or death in bats, but we dont yet know if this new coronavirus would make North American species of bats sick.
Bats are an important part of natural ecosystems, and their populations are already declining in the United States.
Bat populations could be further threatened by the disease itself or by harm inflicted on bats resulting from a misconception that bats are spreading COVID-19.
However, there is no evidence that bats in the United States are a source of the virus that causes COVID-19 for people.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how bats could be affected by COVID-19.
Currently, there is no evidence that you can get infected with the virus that causes COVID-19 by eating food, including wild hunted game meat.
However, hunters can get infected with other diseases when processing or eating game.
Hunters should always practice good hygiene when processing animals by following these food safety recommendations:
You should follow your state and/or local jurisdictional guidance regarding continuing operations at your facility.
There have not been any reports of horses testing positive for the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
COVID-19 is primarily spread from person to person, so steps should be taken to reduce the risks for people visiting your facility.
For more information, see Guidance on Preparing Workplaces for COVID-19pdf iconexternal icon and Interim Guidance for Businesses and Employers to Plan and Respond to Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Community mitigation is especially important before a vaccine or drug becomes widely available.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
Individual people, communities, schools, businesses, and healthcare organizations have a role to play in community mitigation.
Policies*, which include limits on large gatherings, restrictions on businesses, and school closures are often needed to fully put in place community mitigation strategies.
Each community is unique.
Because some actions can be very disruptive to daily life, mitigation activities will be different depending on how much disease has spread within the community, what the community population is like, and the ability to take these actions at the local level.
To identify appropriate activities, all parts of a community that might be affected need to be considered, including populations most vulnerable to severe illness, and those who might be more affected socially or economically.
When selecting mitigation activities, states and communities need to consider the spread of disease locally, characteristics of the people who live in the community (for example, age groups, languages spoken, overall health status), and the kind of public health resources and healthcare systems (like hospitals) that are available in the community.
State and local officials may need to adjust community mitigation activities and immediately take steps to scale them up or down depending on the changing local situation.
Putting mitigation into practice is based on
*CDC cannot address the policies of any business or organization.
CDC shares recommendations based on the best available science to help people make decisions that improve their health and safety.
In all cases, follow the guidance of your healthcare provider and local health department.
Local decisions depend on local circumstances.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
Currently there is no evidence that people can get COVID-19 by eating or handling food.
It may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object, such as a food package or dining ware that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
There is also no current evidence that people can get COVID-19 by drinking water.
The COVID-19 virus has not been detected in drinking water.
Conventional water treatment methods that use filtration and disinfection, such as those in most municipal drinking water systems, should remove or kill the virus that causes COVID-19.​ Learn more about food and COVID-19.
The virus that causes COVID-19 has not been detected in treated drinking water.
Water treatment plants use filters and disinfectants to remove or kill germs, like the virus that causes COVID-19.
The Environmental Protection Agency regulates water treatment plants to ensure that treated water is safe to drink.
Currently, there is no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 can be spread to people by drinking treated water.
COVID-19 is spread mainly through close contact from person-to-person.
You can continue to use and drink water from your tap as usual.
The virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in the feces of some patients diagnosed with COVID-19.
However, it is unclear whether the virus found in feces may be capable of causing COVID-19.
There has not been any confirmed report of the virus spreading from feces to a person.
Scientists also do not know how much risk there is that the virus could be spread from the feces of an infected person to another person.
However, they think this risk is low based on data from previous outbreaks of diseases caused by related coronaviruses, such as severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS).
Recently, ribonucleic acid (RNA) from the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater, and no information to date that anyone has become sick with COVID-19 because of exposure to wastewater.
At this time, the risk of transmission of the virus that causes COVID-19 through properly designed and maintained sewerage systems is thought to be low.
Recently, ribonucleic acid (RNA) from the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater, and no information to date that anyone has become sick with COVID-19 because of exposure to wastewater.
Standard practices associated with wastewater treatment plant operations should be sufficient to protect wastewater workers from the virus that causes COVID-19.
These standard practices can include engineering and administrative controls, hygiene precautions, specific safe work practices, and personal protective equipment (PPE) normally required when handling untreated wastewater.
No additional COVID-19–specific protections are recommended for workers involved in wastewater management, including those at wastewater treatment facilities.
See Information for Wastewater and Sanitation System Workers on COVID-19 for additional information.
In most cases, it is safe to wash your hands with soap and tap water during a Boil Water Advisory.
Follow the guidance from your local public health officials.
If soap and water are not available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in pools, hot tubs, or water playgrounds.
Plus, proper operation of public pools, hot tubs, and water playgrounds (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) and disinfection of the water (with chlorine or bromine) should inactivate the virus.
The virus mainly spreads when respiratory droplets from infected people land in the mouths or noses of others or possibly when inhaled into the lungs by others.
If a public pool, hot tub, or water playground is open, it is important for all visitors and staff to take steps to slow the spread of the virus:
See Considerations for Public Pools, Hot Tubs, and Water Playgrounds for more information.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in pools, including saltwater pools.
Plus, proper operation of public pools (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) and disinfection of the water (with chlorine or bromine) should inactivate the virus.
Saltwater pools are chlorinated pools.
In traditional pools, chlorine products (such as granules or liquid bleach) are added to the water to disinfect it.
In saltwater pools, table salt (made up of sodium and chloride) is added to the water, and an electrical current is then run through the water with dissolved salt.
This creates the same disinfecting form of chlorine that is created when chlorine products are added to the water in traditional pools.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in lakes, oceans, rivers, or other natural bodies of water.
The virus mainly spreads when respiratory droplets from infected people land in the mouths or noses of others or possibly when inhaled into the lungs by others.
If a public beach or other swim area in a natural body of water is open, it is important for all visitors and staff to take steps to slow the spread of the virus:
See Considerations for Public Beaches for more information.
RNAexternal icon of the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater, which can come from combined sewer overflowsexternal icon (rainwater runoff, domestic sewage, and industrial wastewater) and other sourcesexternal icon (such as, leaking septic tanks or animal waste from farms nearby) and enter swim areas.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater.
Plus, CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus being spread by swallowing or coming in contact with water contaminated by feces (poop) from an infected person.
At lakes, oceans, and rivers with routine water quality monitoring programs, staff look for changes in fecal (poop) contamination of the water.
Water quality advisories and beach closures alert the public to avoid getting in or on the water because of increased fecal contamination.
Learn more about healthy swimming in natural bodies of water and access water quality information by state.
No, do NOT wear a cloth mask in the water.
It can be difficult to breathe through a cloth mask when it is wet.
Plus, wet cloth masks dont slow the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19 as well as dry cloth masks.
All of this means it is particularly important to stay at least 6 feet apart in the water from people you dont live with.
In case cloth masks do get wet by mistake, bring a second (or extra) cloth mask for everyone heading out to the public pool or beach.
CDC does not yet have evidence on the effectiveness of different types of cloth materials.
Wearing cloth masks can help prevent people infected with the virus that causes COVID-19 from spreading the virus.
Make sure your cloth mask:
Cloth masks should NOT be worn by children less than 2 years old or anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Learn more about how to wear, take off, and wash your cloth masks.
The design of the public pool, hot tub, or water playground and surrounding deck and if visitors live together or not will affect how many people can stay at least 6 feet apart from those they dont live with.
CDC recommends operators of public pools, hot tubs, and water playgrounds:
Operators might want to limit the number of people in and around the water so if the water needs to be evacuated (because of lightning or other health or safety threat) social distancing can be maintained on the deck.
Otherwise, if the water is evacuated and social distancing cannot be maintained on the deck, close the deck to visitors.
There is no standard formula to determine how many people can maintain social distancing in the water and on the surrounding deck.
See Considerations for Public Pools, Hot Tubs, and Water Playgrounds for more information.
No.
Only List N disinfectants approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agencyexternal icon should be used to disinfect surfaces (such as handrails and in bathrooms) and shared objects (such as kickboards and pool noodles).
The list includes hundreds of disinfectants.
Operators of public pools, hot tubs, or water playgrounds (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) should consult with the design company or engineer to determine which disinfectants are best suited for surfaces and with manufacturers to determine which disinfectants are best suited for shared objects.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectants.
We dont know yet.
Early scientific data suggest that SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, can be inactivated by the suns UV light.
However, the ability of the suns UV light to inactivate the virus on surfaces (such as handrails and in bathrooms) and shared objects (such as kickboards and pool noodles) needs more research.
Factors — such as cloudiness, latitude (distance from equator), time of day, and amount of time exposed to the suns UV light — will determine how effectively the virus is inactivated.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectantsexternal icon.
The more frequently a surface is touched by multiple people, the more frequently it should be cleaned and then disinfected with a List N disinfectant approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agencyexternal icon.
Frequently touched surfaces should be cleaned and disinfected at least daily.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectants.
No.
RNAexternal icon of the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in feces (poop).
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in feces.
Plus, CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus being spread by swallowing or coming in contact with water contaminated by feces from an infected person.
As a result, CDC has not changed its fecal incident response recommendations.
Remember, do NOT vacuum feces out of the water.
Not when lifeguards are actively lifeguarding.
Lifeguards actively lifeguarding should not be doing other tasks that could distract them.
Drowning deaths have resulted, at least in part, from lifeguards being distracted.
Drowning can occur quickly and quietly.
Learn and take steps to prevent drowning.
Lifeguard trainers can consider the following steps to slow the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19:
CDC has more COVID-19–related considerations for public pools and public beaches and non-COVID-19–related healthy and safe swimming resources.
Help control the spread of rumors and be aware of fraud schemes.
1Fever may be subjective or confirmed
2Close contact is defined as—
a) being within approximately 6 feet (2 meters) of a COVID-19 case for a prolonged period of time; close contact can occur while caring for, living with, visiting, or sharing a health care waiting area or room with a COVID-19 case
b) having direct contact with infectious secretions of a COVID-19 case (e.g being coughed on)
If such contact occurs while not wearing recommended personal protective equipment or PPE (e.g gowns, gloves, NIOSH-certified disposable N95 respirator, eye protection), criteria for PUI consideration are met
See CDCs updated Interim Healthcare Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Persons Under Investigation for 2019 Novel Coronavirus.
Data to inform the definition of close contact are limited.
Considerations when assessing close contact include the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk) and the clinical symptoms of the person with COVID-19 (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk as does exposure to a severely ill patient).
Special consideration should be given to those exposed in health care settings.
A novel coronavirus is a new coronavirus that has not been previously identified.
The virus causing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), is not the same as the coronaviruses that commonly circulate among humans and cause mild illness, like the common cold.
On February 11, 2020 the World Health Organization announced an official name for the disease that is causing the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak, first identified in Wuhan China.
The new name of this disease is coronavirus disease 2019, abbreviated as COVID-19.
In COVID-19, ‘CO stands for ‘corona, ‘VI for ‘virus, and ‘D for disease.
Formerly, this disease was referred to as 2019 novel coronavirus or 2019-nCoV.
There are many types of human coronaviruses including some that commonly cause mild upper-respiratory tract illnesses.
COVID-19 is a new disease, caused by a novel (or new) coronavirus that has not previously been seen in humans.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person to person, mainly through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
Spread is more likely when people are in close contact with one another (within about 6 feet).
COVID-19 seems to be spreading easily and sustainably in the community (community spread) in many affected geographic areas.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
It is not yet known whether weather and temperature affect the spread of COVID-19.
Some other viruses, like those that cause the common cold and flu, spread more during cold weather months but that does not mean it is impossible to become sick with these viruses during other months.
There is much more to learn about the transmissibility, severity, and other features associated with COVID-19 and investigations are ongoing.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Each health department determines community spread differently based on local conditions.
For information on community spread in your area, please visit your health departments website.​
At this time, CDC has no data to suggest that this new coronavirus or other similar coronaviruses are spread by mosquitoes or ticks.
The main way that COVID-19 spreads is from person to person.
See How Coronavirus Spreads for more information.
Visit the How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others page to learn about how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19.
Wear masks in public settings when around people not living in your household and particularly where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, such as grocery stores, pharmacies, and gas stations.
Masks may slow the spread of the virus and help people who may have the virus and do not know it from transmitting it to others.
COVID-19 can be spread by people who do not have symptoms and do not know that they are infected.
Thats why its important for everyone to practice social distancing (staying at least 6 feet away from other people) and wear masks in public settings.
Masks provide an extra layer to help prevent the respiratory droplets from traveling in the air and onto other people.
The masks recommended are not surgical masks or N-95 respirators.
Those are critical supplies that must continue to be reserved for healthcare workers and other medical first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
More information about masks can be found on our masks site.
For more information, see Groups at Higher Risk for Severe Illness.
There is still a lot that is unknown about COVID-19 and how it spreads.
Coronaviruses are thought to be spread most often by respiratory droplets.
Although the virus can survive for a short period on some surfaces, it is unlikely to be spread from domestic or international mail, products or packaging.
However, it may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Learn more about safe handling of deliveries and mail.
In healthcare settings across the United States, donated blood is a lifesaving, essential part of caring for patients.
The need for donated blood is constant, and blood centers are open and in urgent need of donations.
CDC encourages people who are well to continue to donate blood if they are able, even if they are practicing social distancing because of COVID-19.
CDC is supporting blood centers by providing recommendations that will keep donors and staff safe.
Examples of these recommendations include spacing donor chairs 6 feet apart, thoroughly adhering to environmental cleaning practices, and encouraging donors to make donation appointments ahead of time.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Handwashing is one of the best ways to protect yourself and your family from getting sick.
Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing; going to the bathroom; and before eating or preparing food.
If soap and water are not readily available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces such as tables, doorknobs, light switches, countertops, handles, desks, phones, keyboards, toilets, faucets, and sinks.
If surfaces are dirty, clean them using detergent or soap and water prior to disinfection.
To disinfect, most common EPA-registered household disinfectants will work.
See CDCs recommendations for household cleaning and disinfection.
Most people who get COVID-19 will be able to recover at home.
CDC has directions for people who are recovering at home and their caregivers, including:
However, some people may need emergency medical attention.
Watch for symptoms and learn when to seek emergency medical attention.
When to Seek Emergency Medical Attention
Look for emergency warning signs* for COVID-19.
If someone is showing any of these signs, seek emergency medical care immediately
*This list is not all possible symptoms.
Please call your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 or call ahead to your local emergency facility: Notify the operator that you are seeking care for someone who has or may have COVID-19.
Based on available evidence, children do not appear to be at higher risk for COVID-19 than adults.
While some children and infants have been sick with COVID-19, adults make up most of the known cases to date.
However, a few children have developed multisystem inflammatory syndrome (MIS-C).
Currently, information about this syndrome is limited.
CDC is working with state and local health departments to learn more about MIS-C.
You can encourage your child to help stop the spread of COVID-19 by teaching them to do the same things everyone should do to stay healthy.
You can find additional information on preventing COVID-19 at How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others.
More information on Keeping Children Healthy during the COVID-19 Outbreak is available online.
No.
The symptoms of COVID-19 are similar in children and adults.
COVID-19 can look different in different people.
For many people, being sick with COVID-19 would be a little bit like having the flu.
People can get a fever, cough, or have a hard time taking deep breaths.
Most people who have gotten COVID-19 have not gotten very sick.
Only a small group of people who get it have had more serious problems.
CDC and partners are investigating cases of multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) associated with COVID-19.
Learn more about COVID-19 and multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C).
CDC recommends that everyone 2 years and older wear a mask that covers their nose and mouth in public settings when around people not living in your household, particularly where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain.
Masks should NOT be put on babies or children younger than 2 because of the danger of suffocation.
Children younger than 2 years of age are listed as an exception as well as anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Outbreaks can be stressful for adults and children.
When you talk with your child, try to stay calm, and reassure them that they are safe.
Talk to your children about COVID-19 and help them cope with stress.
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) is a condition where different body parts can become inflamed, including the heart, lungs, kidneys, brain, skin, eyes, or gastrointestinal organs.
We do not yet know what causes MIS-C.
However, we know that many children with MIS-C had the virus that causes COVID-19, or had been around someone with COVID-19.
MIS-C can be serious, even deadly, but most children who were diagnosed with this condition have gotten better with medical care.
Contact your childs doctor, nurse, or clinic right away if your child is showing symptoms of MIS-C. Seek emergency care right away if your child is showing any of these emergency warning signs of MIS-C or other concerning signs.
The key to slowing the spread of COVID-19 is to practice social distancing.
While school is out, children should not have in-person playdates with children from other households.
If children are playing outside their own homes, it is essential that they remain 6 feet from anyone who is not in their own household.
Some children with certain underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Make sure children practice everyday preventive behaviors, such as washing their hands often with soap and water.
Remember, if children meet outside of school in groups, it can put everyone at risk.
For more information, see Help Stop the Spread of COVID-19 in Children.
For more information, see Help Children Learn at Home.
Check with your school on plans to continue meal services during the school dismissal.
Many schools are keeping school facilities open to allow families to pick up meals or are providing grab-and-go meals at a central location.
For more information, see Keep Children Healthy during the COVID-19 Outbreak.
Older adults and people who have serious underlying medical conditions are at highest risk of getting sick from COVID-19.
Its not known yet whether all children with underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Although most COVID-19 cases in children are not severe, serious illness that needs to be treated at the hospital still happens.
Some data on children reported that the majority who needed hospitalization for COVID-19 had at least one underlying medical condition.
The most common underlying conditions reported among children with COVID-19 include chronic lung disease (including asthma), heart disease, and conditions that weaken the immune system.
This information suggests that children with these underlying medical conditions may be at risk for more severe illness from COVID-19.
More data are needed to learn which underlying or complex medical conditions may put children at increased risk.
CDC is monitoring new information as it becomes available and will provide updates as needed.
Learn more about caring for children with special health care needs during a disaster and people who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
In addition to following the recommendations to prevent getting sick and running essential errands, families should take extra steps recommended for persons with higher risk of severe COVID-19 illness and steps outlined for those with potential COVID-19 exposure or confirmed illness.
Helping children understand and follow recommendations, like social distancing and wearing masks, can be challenging if your child has intellectual disabilities, sensory issues, or other special healthcare needs.
Supporting children with special healthcare needs can put additional demands and stress on families, especially during emergency situations.
You have likely found ways to manage the stress and challenges unique to your familys situation.
It is important to continue your familys coping methods, including reaching out to other family members, friends, support groups, and organizations that have been helpful in the past.
See information on helping children cope and coping with stress (such as visiting parks, trails, or open spaces) and making your family stronger.
If you, or someone you care about, are feeling overwhelmed with emotions like sadness, depression, or anxiety, or feel like you want to harm yourself or others:
If your child with special healthcare needs becomes sick with symptoms of COVID-19, contact your childs healthcare provider.
If your child has new or worsening emergency warning signs, such as trouble breathing, pain or pressure in the chest, confusion or inability to wake them up, or bluish lips or face, call 911.
If you think your child may have COVID-19, notify the operator so that first responders may be appropriately prepared to protect themselves and others.
Notify your childs healthcare provider if someone else in your house becomes sick with COVID-19, so they can provide any advice specific for your child.
See additional information if someone in the home is sick with COVID-19 or suspected of having COVID-19.
If your childs healthcare provider tells you to go to the hospital for any health problem, including COVID-19
Create a household plan of action to help protect your health and the health of those you care about in the event of an outbreak of COVID-19 in your community:
Plan for potential changes at your workplace.
Talk to your employer about their emergency operations plan, including sick-leave policies and telework options.
Learn how businesses and employers can plan for and respond to COVID-19.
CDC does not encourage the production and use of homemade hand sanitizer products because of concerns over the correct use of the ingredientsexternal icon and the need to work under sterile conditions to make the product.
Local industries that are looking into producing hand sanitizer to fill in for commercial shortages can refer to the World Health Organization guidance.pdf iconexternal icon Organizations should revert to the use of commercially produced, FDA-approved product once such supplies again become available.
People with COVID-19 have reported a wide range of symptoms – from mild symptoms to severe illness.
Symptoms may appear 2-14 days after exposure to the virus.
If you have fever, cough, or other symptoms, you might have COVID-19.
Look for emergency warning signs* for COVID-19.
If someone is showing any of these signs, seek emergency medical care immediately
*This list is not all possible symptoms.
Please call your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 or call ahead to your local emergency facility: Notify the operator that you are seeking care for someone who has or may have COVID-19.
Yes.
It is possible to test positive for flu (as well as other respiratory infections) and COVID-19 at the same time.
Maybe; not everyone needs to be tested for COVID-19.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and want to get tested, call your healthcare provider first.
Most people will have mild illness and can recover at home without medical care and may not need to be tested.
CDC has guidance for who should be tested, but decisions about testing are made by state and local health departments and healthcare providers.
You can also visit your state or local health departments website to look for the latest local information on testing.
Decisions about testing are made by state and localexternal icon health departments or healthcare providers.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and are not tested, it is important to stay home.
What to do if you are sick.
COVID-19 testing differs by location.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and want to get tested, call your healthcare provider first.
You can also visit your state or localexternal icon health departments website to look for the latest local information on testing.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized viral tests that let you collect either a nasal swabexternal icon or a saliva sampleexternal icon at home.
However, you will still need to send your sample to a laboratory for analysis.
If you test positive for COVID-19, know what protective steps to take if you are sick or caring for someone.
If you test negative for COVID-19, you probably were not infected at the time your sample was collected.
However, that does not mean you will not get sick.
The test result only means that you did not have COVID-19 at the time of testing.
You might test negative if the sample was collected early in your infection and test positive later during your illness.
You could also be exposed to COVID-19 after the test and get infected then.
This means you could still spread the virus.
If you develop symptoms later, you might need another test to determine if you are infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.
For more information about viral tests, please visit Test for Current Infection.
Antibody tests for COVID-19 are available through healthcare providers and laboratories.
Check with your healthcare provider to see if they offer antibody tests and whether you should get one.
A positive test result shows you might have antibodies from an infection with the virus that causes COVID-19.
However, there is a chance a positive result means that you have antibodies from an infection with a virus from the same family of viruses (called coronaviruses), such as the one that causes the common cold.
Having antibodies to the virus that causes COVID-19 might provide protection from getting infected with the virus again.
If it does, we do not know how much protection the antibodies might provide or how long this protection might last.
You should continue to protect yourself and others since you could get infected with the virus again.
If you test negative, you might not have ever had COVID-19.
Talk with your healthcare provider about your test result and the type of test you took to understand what your result means.
Regardless of whether you test positive or negative, the results do not confirm whether or not you are able to spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
Until we know more, continue to take steps to protect yourself and others.
If you want more information about antibody tests, see Test for Past Infection.
Yes, it is possible.
You may test negative if the sample was collected early in your infection and test positive later during this illness.
You could also be exposed to COVID-19 after the test and get infected then.
Even if you test negative, you still should take steps to protect yourself and others.
See Testing for Current Infection for more information.
COVID-19 is a new disease and there is limited information regarding risk factors for severe disease.
Based on currently available information and clinical expertise, older adults and people with underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
If you are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19, you should:
Most people with disabilities are not inherently at higher risk for becoming infected with or having severe illness from COVID-19.
Some people with physical limitations or other disabilities might be at a higher risk of infection because of their underlying medical condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Contact tracing has been used for decades by state and local health departments to slow or stop the spread of infectious diseases.
Contact tracing slows the spread of COVID-19 by
During contact tracing, the health department staff will not ask you for
Discussions with health department staff are confidential.
This means that your personal and medical information will be kept private and only shared with those who may need to know, like your health care provider.
If you have been diagnosed with COVID-19, your name will not be shared with those you came in contact with.
The health department will only notify people you were in close contact with (within 6 feet for more than 15 minutes) that they might have been exposed to COVID-19.
Each state and jurisdiction use their own method for collecting and protecting health information.
To learn more, contact your state or local health department.
You may also be interested in: If I participate contact tracing for COVID-19 using a digital tool, is my personal health information secure?
For COVID-19, a close contact is anyone who was within 6 feet of an infected person for at least 15 minutes.
An infected person can spread COVID-19 starting 48 hours (or 2 days) before the person had any symptoms or tested positive for COVID-19.
Yes, you are still considered a close contact even if you were wearing a mask while you were around someone with COVID-19.
Masks are meant to protect other people in case you are infected, and not to protect you from becoming infected.
If you have been around someone who is sick with COVID-19, local authorities, the health department, or your doctor may recommend that you get tested for COVID-19.
The health department may be able to provide resources for testing in your area.
If you are diagnosed with COVID-19, someone from the health department may call you to check on your health, discuss who you have been around, and ask where you spent time while you may have been able to spread COVID-19 to others.
You will also be asked to continue to stay at home and self-isolate, away from others.
Watch for or monitor your symptoms of COVID-19.
If your symptoms worsen or become severe, you should seek medical care.
If you were around someone who has been diagnosed with COVID-19, someone from the health department may call you to let you know that you may have been exposed to COVID-19.
Stay home away from others for 14 days (self-quarantine) after your last contact with that person.
Health department staff will help identify the dates for your self-quarantine.
Health department staff can also provide resources for COVID-19 testing in your area.
Monitor your health and watch for symptoms of COVID-19.
Remember, symptoms may appear 2-14 days after you were exposed to COVID-19.
Tell the health department if you develop any symptoms.
Tell people you were around recently if you become ill, so they can monitor their health.
If your symptoms worsen or become severe, seek medical care.
Severe symptoms include trouble breathing, persistent pain or pressure in the chest, new confusion, inability to wake or stay awake, or bluish lips or face.
The health department staff will not ask you for
Yes.
You should still self-quarantine for 14 days since your last exposure.
It can take up to 14 days after exposure to the virus for a person to develop COVID-19 symptoms.
A negative result before end of the 14-day quarantine period does not rule out possible infection.
By self-quarantining for 14 days, you lower the chance of possibly exposing others to COVID-19.
People with COVID-19 can still spread the virus even if they dont have any symptoms.
If you were around someone who had COVID-19, it is critical that you stay home and away from others for 14 days from the last day that you were around that person.
Staying home and away from others at all times helps your health department in the fight against COVID-19 and helps protect you, your family, and your community.
If you have been around someone who was identified as a close contact to a person with COVID-19, closely monitor yourself for any symptoms of COVID-19.
You do not need to self-quarantine unless you develop symptoms or if the person identified as a close contact develops COVID-19.
No, there will not be a national app for contact tracing.
There are many options available now, and it is up to each state and individual to decide which tools best fit their needs.
Yes, if you agree to participate in contact tracing for COVID-19 with the health department, your information is secure.
Discussions with health department staff are confidential.
This means that your personal and medical information will be kept private and only shared with those who may need to know, like your health care provider.
Your name will not be shared with those you came in contact with.
If you have been diagnosed with COVID-19, the health department will only notify people you were in close contact with (within 6 feet for more than 15 minutes) that they might have been exposed to COVID-19.
Health departments may use case management tools to help make the contact tracing process more efficient.
If you choose to provide information through one of these tools, your information is secure and stored with the health department.
These tools also help health departments quickly receive and analyze information about COVID-19.
Case management tools are under the same laws and regulations for all sensitive health information use (e.g.
HIPPA).
You must provide consent for the health department to collect information using a case management tool.
Just like traditional contact tracing, digital tools will not collect information regarding money, Social Security numbers, bank account information, salary information, or credit card numbers.
Exposure notification tools may be an app that you can download on your personal cell phone.
If you choose to download an exposure notification app for COVID-19, your information is secure.
Exposure notification apps are developed in collaboration with or endorsed by health departments.
These apps undergo rigorous testing to determine their trustworthiness, security, and ability to protect peoples privacy.
Until you give consent to share information with your local health department, any information you have entered into the app is stored only on your personal phone.
Your information is stored only on your own phone and is not sent to the health department or any other third party.
The app and your information can be deleted any time.
When you consent to share your information with the local health department, your information is secure.
No, you are not required to download an app to give information for contact tracing for COVID-19.
Health departments commonly use case management tools to make the contact tracing process more efficient.
These types of tools are not downloaded on personal cell phones.
If you choose to give information to your local or state health department for contact tracing for COVID-19, you do not need to download an app on your cell phone.
The health department staff may call you to
It is up to you to decide if you download an exposure notification app for COVID-19.
There is currently no known risk associated with being in the same room at a funeral or visitation service with the body of someone who died of COVID-19.
See How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others to learn how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19, if you decide to attend a funeral or visitation.
COVID-19 is a new disease and we are still learning how it spreads.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
This type of spread is not a concern after death.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
This is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
People should consider not touching the body of someone who has died of COVID-19.
Older people and people of all ages with severe underlying health conditions are at higher risk of severe illness from COVID-19.
There may be less of a chance of the virus spreading from certain types of touching, such as holding the hand or hugging after the body has been prepared for viewing.
Other activities, such as kissing, washing, and shrouding should be avoided before, during, and after the body has been prepared, if possible.
If washing the body or shrouding are important religious or cultural practices, families are encouraged to work with their communitys cultural and religious leaders and funeral home staff on how to reduce their exposure as much as possible.
At a minimum, people conducting these activities should wear disposable gloves.
If splashing of fluids is expected, additional personal protective equipment (PPE) may be required (such as disposable gown, face shield, or goggles and N-95 respirator).
If desired, you may retrieve the belongings of a loved one who has died of COVID-19 outside their home (for example, in a hospital setting).
Depending on local rules and regulations, family members may retrieve these belongings at the funeral home or the healthcare facility.
You should use gloves and practice good hand hygiene when handling your loved ones belongings.
Depending on the type of belongings, such as electronics, you should also follow the household item-specific cleaning and disinfection guidelines when handling these items.
When a US citizen dies outside the United States, the deceased persons next of kin or legal representative should notify US consular officials at the Department of State.
Consular personnel are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, to provide assistance to US citizens for overseas emergencies.
If a family member, domestic partner, or legal representative is in a different country from the deceased person, he or she should call the Department of States Office of Overseas Citizens Services in Washington, DC, from 8 am to 5 pm Eastern time, Monday through Friday, at 888-407-4747 (toll-free) or 202-501-4444.
For emergency assistance after working hours or on weekends and holidays, call the Department of State switchboard at 202-647-4000 and ask to speak with the Overseas Citizens Services duty officer.
In addition, the US embassyexternal iconexternal iconexternal icon closest to or in the country where the US citizen died can provide assistance.
CDC does not require an autopsy before the remains of a person who died overseas are returned to the United States.
Depending on the circumstances surrounding the death, some countries may require an autopsy.
Sources of support to the family include the local consulate or embassy, travel insurance provider, tour operator, faith-based and aid organizations, and the deceaseds employer.
There likely will need to be an official identification of the body and official documents issued by the consular office.
CDC requirements for importing human remains depend upon if the body has been embalmed, cremated, or if the person died from a quarantinable communicable disease.
At this time, COVID-19 is a quarantinable communicable disease in the United States and the remains must meet the standards for importation found in 42 Code of Federal Regulations Part 71.55 and may be cleared, released, and authorized for entry into the United States only under the following conditions:
Please see CDCs guidance for additional information.
Cleaning with soap and water removes germs, dirt, and impurities from surfaces.
It lowers the risk of spreading infection.
Disinfecting kills germs on surfaces.
By killing germs on a surface after cleaning, it can further lower the risk of spreading infection.
The risk of transmitting or spreading SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, during vacuuming is unknown.
In order to reduce the need for cleaning, disinfection, and vacuuming, consider removing area rugs completely, if possible.
At this time, there are no reported cases of COVID-19 associated with vacuuming.
If vacuuming is necessary or required in a school, business, or community facility that was used by a person with suspected or confirmed COVID-19, first follow the CDC recommendations for Cleaning and Disinfection for Community Facilities that apply, which includes a wait time of 24 hours, or as long as practical.
After cleaning and disinfection, the following recommendations may help reduce the risk to workers and other individuals when vacuuming:
Routine cleaning is the everyday cleaning practices that businesses and communities normally use to maintain a healthy environment.
Surfaces frequently touched by multiple people, such as door handles, bathroom surfaces, and handrails, should be cleaned with soap and water or another detergent at least daily when facilities are in use.
More frequent cleaning and disinfection may be required based on level of use.
For example, certain surfaces and objects in public spaces, such as shopping carts and point of sale keypads, should be cleaned and disinfected before each use.
Cleaning removes dirt and impurities, including germs, from surfaces.
Cleaning alone does not kill germs, but it reduces the number of germs on a surface.
Cleaning does not kill germs, but by removing them, it lowers their numbers and the risk of spreading infection.
If a surface may have gotten the virus on it from a person with or suspected to have COVID-19, the surface should be cleaned and disinfected.
Disinfecting kills germs on surfaces.
Regular cleaning staff can clean and disinfect community spaces.
Cleaning staff should be trained on appropriate use of cleaning and disinfection chemicals and provided with the personal protective equipment (PPE) required for the chemicals used.
Companies do not necessarily need to close after a person with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 has been in a company facility.
The area(s) used or visited by the ill person should be closed for 24 hours or as long as possible.
Open outside doors and windows as much as possible ensuring that doing so does not pose a safety risk to children using the facility (i.e.
make sure that children are not able to enter the closed off area through any windows or doors).
and use ventilating fans to increase air circulation in the area.
Once the area has been appropriately disinfected, it can be opened for use.
Workers without close contact with the person with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 can return to work immediately after disinfection is completed.
The efficacy of these disinfection methods against the virus that causes COVID-19 is not known.
EPA only recommends use of the surface disinfectants identified on List Nexternal icon against the virus that causes COVID-19.
EPA does not routinely review the safety or efficacy of pesticidal devices, such as UV lights, LED lights, or ultrasonic devices.
Therefore, EPA cannot confirm whether, or under what circumstances, such products might be effective against the spread of COVID-19.
Outdoor areas generally require normal routine cleaning and do not require disinfection.
Spraying disinfectant on outdoor playgrounds is not an efficient use of disinfectant supplies and has not been proven to reduce the risk of COVID-19 to the public.
You should maintain existing cleaning and hygiene practices for outdoor areas.
If practical, high touch surfaces made of plastic or metal, such as grab bars and railings, should be cleaned routinely.
Cleaning and disinfection of wooden surfaces (e.g play structures, benches, tables) or groundcovers (e.g mulch, sand) is not recommended.
CDC does not recommend the use of sanitizing tunnels.
There is no evidence that they are effective in reducing the spread of COVID-19.
Chemicals used in sanitizing tunnels could cause skin, eye, or respiratory irritation or damage.
CDC does not recommend disinfection of sidewalks or roads.
Spraying disinfectant on sidewalks and roads is not an efficient use of disinfectant supplies and has not been proven to reduce the risk of COVID-19 to the public.
The risk of spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 from these surfaces is very low and disinfection is not effective on these surfaces.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
See If You Have Pets for more information about pets and COVID-19.
However, since animals can spread other diseases to people, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, such as washing your hands and maintaining good hygiene.
For more information on the many benefits of pet ownership, as well as staying safe and healthy around animals including pets, livestock, and wildlife, visit CDCs Healthy Pets, Healthy People website.
Although we know certain bacteria and fungi can be carried on fur and hair, there is no evidence that viruses, including the virus that causes COVID-19, can spread to people from the skin, fur, or hair of pets.
However, because animals can sometimes carry other germs that can make people sick, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, including washing hands before and after interacting with them.
Dog parks provide socialization and exercise for dogs, which is an important part of their wellbeing.
Because there is a risk that people with COVID-19 could spread it to animals, CDC recommends that you do not let pets interact with people outside of your household, especially in places with community spread of COVID-19.
Therefore, you should consider avoiding dog parks or other places where large numbers of people and dogs gather.
Some areas are allowing dog parks to open.
If you choose to go to a dog park, follow local guidelines.
There are ways to reduce the risk of you or your dog getting infected with COVID-19 if you go to a dog park.
See more information on pets and COVID-19 and recommendations for how to help keep your pet safe.
Until we know more about how this virus affects animals, CDC encourages pet owners to treat pets as you would other human family members to protect them from possible infection.
This means limiting contact between your pets and people outside your household as much as possible and avoiding places where large numbers of people gather.
Some areas are allowing groomers and boarding facilities such as dog daycares to open.
If you must take your pet to a groomer or boarding facility, follow any protocols put into place at the facility, such as wearing a mask and maintaining at least 6 feet of space between yourself and others if possible.
Limit pet items brought from home to the groomer or boarding facility, and disinfect any objects that are taken into a facility and returned home (such as leashes, bowls, and toys).
Use an EPA-registered disinfectantexternal icon to clean items and rinse thoroughly with clean water afterwards.
Do not wipe or bathe your pet with chemical disinfectants, alcohol, hydrogen peroxide, or other products, such as hand sanitizer, counter-cleaning wipes, or other industrial or surface cleaners.
If you have questions about appropriate products for bathing or cleaning your pet, talk to your veterinarian.
Do not put masks on pets, and do not take a sick pet to a groomer or boarding facility.
Signs of sickness in dogs may include fever, coughing, difficulty breathing or shortness of breath, lethargy, sneezing, discharge from the nose or eyes, vomiting, or diarrhea.
If you think your pet is sick, call your veterinarian.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
See more information on pets and COVID-19 and recommendations for how to help keep your pet safe.
Most pets that have gotten sick from the virus that causes COVID-19 were infected after close contact with a person with COVID-19.
Talk to your veterinarian about any health concerns you have about your pets.
If your pet gets sick after contact with a person with COVID-19, call your veterinarian and let them know the pet was around a person with COVID-19.
If you are sick with COVID-19, do not take your pet to the veterinary clinic yourself.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
Routine testing of animals for COVID-19 is not recommended at this time.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
However, it appears that the virus that causes COVID-19 can spread from people to animals after close contact with people with COVID-19.
Until we learn more about how this virus affects animals, use similar precautions for pets and other animals in your facility as you would for other people in your facility.
This will help protect both people and pets in your facility from COVID-19.
Talk to a veterinarian if a pet in your facility gets sick or if you have any concerns about the health of any pets in the facility.
If you think a pet in the facility was exposed to or is showing signs consistent with COVID-19, contact your state health official to discuss guidance on testing pets or other animals for the virus that causes COVID-19.
People who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 should avoid providing care for sick pets, if possible.
For more information, visit CDCs If You Have Pets webpage.
CDC does not have any evidence to suggest that imported animals or animal products pose a risk for spreading COVID-19 in the United States.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
CDC, the U. S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) play distinct but complementary roles in regulating the importation of live animals and animal products into the United States.
Please refer to CDCs requirements for bringing a dog to the United States.
The current requirements for rabies vaccination apply to dogs imported from high-risk countries for rabies.
Imported animals will need to meet CDC and USDAsexternal iconexternal icon requirements for entering the United States.
At this time, there is no evidence that companion animals, including pets and service animals, can spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
As with any animal introduced to a new environment, animals recently imported should be observed daily for signs of illness.
If an animal becomes ill, the animal should be examined by a veterinarian.
Call your local veterinary clinic before bringing the animal into the clinic and let them know that the animal was recently imported from another country.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
Currently, there is no evidence to suggest the virus that causes COVID-19 is circulating in free-living wildlife in the United States, or that wildlife might be a source of infection for people in the United States.
If a wild animal were to become infected with the virus, we dont know whether the infection could then spread among wildlife or if it could spread to other animals, including pets.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals, including wildlife, could be affected by COVID-19.
Because wildlife can carry other diseases, even without looking sick, it is always important to enjoy wildlife from a distance.
Take steps to prevent getting sick from wildlife in the United States:
See COVID-19 and Animals for more information.
Other coronaviruses have been found in North American bats in the past, but there is currently no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 is present in any free-living wildlife in the United States, including bats.
In general, coronaviruses do not cause illness or death in bats, but we dont yet know if this new coronavirus would make North American species of bats sick.
Bats are an important part of natural ecosystems, and their populations are already declining in the United States.
Bat populations could be further threatened by the disease itself or by harm inflicted on bats resulting from a misconception that bats are spreading COVID-19.
However, there is no evidence that bats in the United States are a source of the virus that causes COVID-19 for people.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how bats could be affected by COVID-19.
Currently, there is no evidence that you can get infected with the virus that causes COVID-19 by eating food, including wild hunted game meat.
However, hunters can get infected with other diseases when processing or eating game.
Hunters should always practice good hygiene when processing animals by following these food safety recommendations:
You should follow your state and/or local jurisdictional guidance regarding continuing operations at your facility.
There have not been any reports of horses testing positive for the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
COVID-19 is primarily spread from person to person, so steps should be taken to reduce the risks for people visiting your facility.
For more information, see Guidance on Preparing Workplaces for COVID-19pdf iconexternal icon and Interim Guidance for Businesses and Employers to Plan and Respond to Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Community mitigation is especially important before a vaccine or drug becomes widely available.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
Individual people, communities, schools, businesses, and healthcare organizations have a role to play in community mitigation.
Policies*, which include limits on large gatherings, restrictions on businesses, and school closures are often needed to fully put in place community mitigation strategies.
Each community is unique.
Because some actions can be very disruptive to daily life, mitigation activities will be different depending on how much disease has spread within the community, what the community population is like, and the ability to take these actions at the local level.
To identify appropriate activities, all parts of a community that might be affected need to be considered, including populations most vulnerable to severe illness, and those who might be more affected socially or economically.
When selecting mitigation activities, states and communities need to consider the spread of disease locally, characteristics of the people who live in the community (for example, age groups, languages spoken, overall health status), and the kind of public health resources and healthcare systems (like hospitals) that are available in the community.
State and local officials may need to adjust community mitigation activities and immediately take steps to scale them up or down depending on the changing local situation.
Putting mitigation into practice is based on
*CDC cannot address the policies of any business or organization.
CDC shares recommendations based on the best available science to help people make decisions that improve their health and safety.
In all cases, follow the guidance of your healthcare provider and local health department.
Local decisions depend on local circumstances.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
Currently there is no evidence that people can get COVID-19 by eating or handling food.
It may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object, such as a food package or dining ware that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
There is also no current evidence that people can get COVID-19 by drinking water.
The COVID-19 virus has not been detected in drinking water.
Conventional water treatment methods that use filtration and disinfection, such as those in most municipal drinking water systems, should remove or kill the virus that causes COVID-19.​ Learn more about food and COVID-19.
The virus that causes COVID-19 has not been detected in treated drinking water.
Water treatment plants use filters and disinfectants to remove or kill germs, like the virus that causes COVID-19.
The Environmental Protection Agency regulates water treatment plants to ensure that treated water is safe to drink.
Currently, there is no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 can be spread to people by drinking treated water.
COVID-19 is spread mainly through close contact from person-to-person.
You can continue to use and drink water from your tap as usual.
The virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in the feces of some patients diagnosed with COVID-19.
However, it is unclear whether the virus found in feces may be capable of causing COVID-19.
There has not been any confirmed report of the virus spreading from feces to a person.
Scientists also do not know how much risk there is that the virus could be spread from the feces of an infected person to another person.
However, they think this risk is low based on data from previous outbreaks of diseases caused by related coronaviruses, such as severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS).
Recently, ribonucleic acid (RNA) from the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater, and no information to date that anyone has become sick with COVID-19 because of exposure to wastewater.
At this time, the risk of transmission of the virus that causes COVID-19 through properly designed and maintained sewerage systems is thought to be low.
Recently, ribonucleic acid (RNA) from the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater, and no information to date that anyone has become sick with COVID-19 because of exposure to wastewater.
Standard practices associated with wastewater treatment plant operations should be sufficient to protect wastewater workers from the virus that causes COVID-19.
These standard practices can include engineering and administrative controls, hygiene precautions, specific safe work practices, and personal protective equipment (PPE) normally required when handling untreated wastewater.
No additional COVID-19–specific protections are recommended for workers involved in wastewater management, including those at wastewater treatment facilities.
See Information for Wastewater and Sanitation System Workers on COVID-19 for additional information.
In most cases, it is safe to wash your hands with soap and tap water during a Boil Water Advisory.
Follow the guidance from your local public health officials.
If soap and water are not available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in pools, hot tubs, or water playgrounds.
Plus, proper operation of public pools, hot tubs, and water playgrounds (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) and disinfection of the water (with chlorine or bromine) should inactivate the virus.
The virus mainly spreads when respiratory droplets from infected people land in the mouths or noses of others or possibly when inhaled into the lungs by others.
If a public pool, hot tub, or water playground is open, it is important for all visitors and staff to take steps to slow the spread of the virus:
See Considerations for Public Pools, Hot Tubs, and Water Playgrounds for more information.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in pools, including saltwater pools.
Plus, proper operation of public pools (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) and disinfection of the water (with chlorine or bromine) should inactivate the virus.
Saltwater pools are chlorinated pools.
In traditional pools, chlorine products (such as granules or liquid bleach) are added to the water to disinfect it.
In saltwater pools, table salt (made up of sodium and chloride) is added to the water, and an electrical current is then run through the water with dissolved salt.
This creates the same disinfecting form of chlorine that is created when chlorine products are added to the water in traditional pools.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in lakes, oceans, rivers, or other natural bodies of water.
The virus mainly spreads when respiratory droplets from infected people land in the mouths or noses of others or possibly when inhaled into the lungs by others.
If a public beach or other swim area in a natural body of water is open, it is important for all visitors and staff to take steps to slow the spread of the virus:
See Considerations for Public Beaches for more information.
RNAexternal icon of the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater, which can come from combined sewer overflowsexternal icon (rainwater runoff, domestic sewage, and industrial wastewater) and other sourcesexternal icon (such as, leaking septic tanks or animal waste from farms nearby) and enter swim areas.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater.
Plus, CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus being spread by swallowing or coming in contact with water contaminated by feces (poop) from an infected person.
At lakes, oceans, and rivers with routine water quality monitoring programs, staff look for changes in fecal (poop) contamination of the water.
Water quality advisories and beach closures alert the public to avoid getting in or on the water because of increased fecal contamination.
Learn more about healthy swimming in natural bodies of water and access water quality information by state.
No, do NOT wear a cloth mask in the water.
It can be difficult to breathe through a cloth mask when it is wet.
Plus, wet cloth masks dont slow the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19 as well as dry cloth masks.
All of this means it is particularly important to stay at least 6 feet apart in the water from people you dont live with.
In case cloth masks do get wet by mistake, bring a second (or extra) cloth mask for everyone heading out to the public pool or beach.
CDC does not yet have evidence on the effectiveness of different types of cloth materials.
Wearing cloth masks can help prevent people infected with the virus that causes COVID-19 from spreading the virus.
Make sure your cloth mask:
Cloth masks should NOT be worn by children less than 2 years old or anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Learn more about how to wear, take off, and wash your cloth masks.
The design of the public pool, hot tub, or water playground and surrounding deck and if visitors live together or not will affect how many people can stay at least 6 feet apart from those they dont live with.
CDC recommends operators of public pools, hot tubs, and water playgrounds:
Operators might want to limit the number of people in and around the water so if the water needs to be evacuated (because of lightning or other health or safety threat) social distancing can be maintained on the deck.
Otherwise, if the water is evacuated and social distancing cannot be maintained on the deck, close the deck to visitors.
There is no standard formula to determine how many people can maintain social distancing in the water and on the surrounding deck.
See Considerations for Public Pools, Hot Tubs, and Water Playgrounds for more information.
No.
Only List N disinfectants approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agencyexternal icon should be used to disinfect surfaces (such as handrails and in bathrooms) and shared objects (such as kickboards and pool noodles).
The list includes hundreds of disinfectants.
Operators of public pools, hot tubs, or water playgrounds (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) should consult with the design company or engineer to determine which disinfectants are best suited for surfaces and with manufacturers to determine which disinfectants are best suited for shared objects.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectants.
We dont know yet.
Early scientific data suggest that SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, can be inactivated by the suns UV light.
However, the ability of the suns UV light to inactivate the virus on surfaces (such as handrails and in bathrooms) and shared objects (such as kickboards and pool noodles) needs more research.
Factors — such as cloudiness, latitude (distance from equator), time of day, and amount of time exposed to the suns UV light — will determine how effectively the virus is inactivated.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectantsexternal icon.
The more frequently a surface is touched by multiple people, the more frequently it should be cleaned and then disinfected with a List N disinfectant approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agencyexternal icon.
Frequently touched surfaces should be cleaned and disinfected at least daily.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectants.
No.
RNAexternal icon of the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in feces (poop).
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in feces.
Plus, CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus being spread by swallowing or coming in contact with water contaminated by feces from an infected person.
As a result, CDC has not changed its fecal incident response recommendations.
Remember, do NOT vacuum feces out of the water.
Not when lifeguards are actively lifeguarding.
Lifeguards actively lifeguarding should not be doing other tasks that could distract them.
Drowning deaths have resulted, at least in part, from lifeguards being distracted.
Drowning can occur quickly and quietly.
Learn and take steps to prevent drowning.
Lifeguard trainers can consider the following steps to slow the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19:
CDC has more COVID-19–related considerations for public pools and public beaches and non-COVID-19–related healthy and safe swimming resources.
Help control the spread of rumors and be aware of fraud schemes.
1Fever may be subjective or confirmed
2Close contact is defined as—
a) being within approximately 6 feet (2 meters) of a COVID-19 case for a prolonged period of time; close contact can occur while caring for, living with, visiting, or sharing a health care waiting area or room with a COVID-19 case
b) having direct contact with infectious secretions of a COVID-19 case (e.g being coughed on)
If such contact occurs while not wearing recommended personal protective equipment or PPE (e.g gowns, gloves, NIOSH-certified disposable N95 respirator, eye protection), criteria for PUI consideration are met
See CDCs updated Interim Healthcare Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Persons Under Investigation for 2019 Novel Coronavirus.
Data to inform the definition of close contact are limited.
Considerations when assessing close contact include the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk) and the clinical symptoms of the person with COVID-19 (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk as does exposure to a severely ill patient).
Special consideration should be given to those exposed in health care settings.
A novel coronavirus is a new coronavirus that has not been previously identified.
The virus causing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), is not the same as the coronaviruses that commonly circulate among humans and cause mild illness, like the common cold.
On February 11, 2020 the World Health Organization announced an official name for the disease that is causing the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak, first identified in Wuhan China.
The new name of this disease is coronavirus disease 2019, abbreviated as COVID-19.
In COVID-19, ‘CO stands for ‘corona, ‘VI for ‘virus, and ‘D for disease.
Formerly, this disease was referred to as 2019 novel coronavirus or 2019-nCoV.
There are many types of human coronaviruses including some that commonly cause mild upper-respiratory tract illnesses.
COVID-19 is a new disease, caused by a novel (or new) coronavirus that has not previously been seen in humans.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person to person, mainly through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
Spread is more likely when people are in close contact with one another (within about 6 feet).
COVID-19 seems to be spreading easily and sustainably in the community (community spread) in many affected geographic areas.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
It is not yet known whether weather and temperature affect the spread of COVID-19.
Some other viruses, like those that cause the common cold and flu, spread more during cold weather months but that does not mean it is impossible to become sick with these viruses during other months.
There is much more to learn about the transmissibility, severity, and other features associated with COVID-19 and investigations are ongoing.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Each health department determines community spread differently based on local conditions.
For information on community spread in your area, please visit your health departments website.​
At this time, CDC has no data to suggest that this new coronavirus or other similar coronaviruses are spread by mosquitoes or ticks.
The main way that COVID-19 spreads is from person to person.
See How Coronavirus Spreads for more information.
Visit the How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others page to learn about how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19.
Wear masks in public settings when around people not living in your household and particularly where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, such as grocery stores, pharmacies, and gas stations.
Masks may slow the spread of the virus and help people who may have the virus and do not know it from transmitting it to others.
COVID-19 can be spread by people who do not have symptoms and do not know that they are infected.
Thats why its important for everyone to practice social distancing (staying at least 6 feet away from other people) and wear masks in public settings.
Masks provide an extra layer to help prevent the respiratory droplets from traveling in the air and onto other people.
The masks recommended are not surgical masks or N-95 respirators.
Those are critical supplies that must continue to be reserved for healthcare workers and other medical first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
More information about masks can be found on our masks site.
For more information, see Groups at Higher Risk for Severe Illness.
There is still a lot that is unknown about COVID-19 and how it spreads.
Coronaviruses are thought to be spread most often by respiratory droplets.
Although the virus can survive for a short period on some surfaces, it is unlikely to be spread from domestic or international mail, products or packaging.
However, it may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Learn more about safe handling of deliveries and mail.
In healthcare settings across the United States, donated blood is a lifesaving, essential part of caring for patients.
The need for donated blood is constant, and blood centers are open and in urgent need of donations.
CDC encourages people who are well to continue to donate blood if they are able, even if they are practicing social distancing because of COVID-19.
CDC is supporting blood centers by providing recommendations that will keep donors and staff safe.
Examples of these recommendations include spacing donor chairs 6 feet apart, thoroughly adhering to environmental cleaning practices, and encouraging donors to make donation appointments ahead of time.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Handwashing is one of the best ways to protect yourself and your family from getting sick.
Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing; going to the bathroom; and before eating or preparing food.
If soap and water are not readily available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces such as tables, doorknobs, light switches, countertops, handles, desks, phones, keyboards, toilets, faucets, and sinks.
If surfaces are dirty, clean them using detergent or soap and water prior to disinfection.
To disinfect, most common EPA-registered household disinfectants will work.
See CDCs recommendations for household cleaning and disinfection.
Most people who get COVID-19 will be able to recover at home.
CDC has directions for people who are recovering at home and their caregivers, including:
However, some people may need emergency medical attention.
Watch for symptoms and learn when to seek emergency medical attention.
When to Seek Emergency Medical Attention
Look for emergency warning signs* for COVID-19.
If someone is showing any of these signs, seek emergency medical care immediately
*This list is not all possible symptoms.
Please call your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 or call ahead to your local emergency facility: Notify the operator that you are seeking care for someone who has or may have COVID-19.
Based on available evidence, children do not appear to be at higher risk for COVID-19 than adults.
While some children and infants have been sick with COVID-19, adults make up most of the known cases to date.
However, a few children have developed multisystem inflammatory syndrome (MIS-C).
Currently, information about this syndrome is limited.
CDC is working with state and local health departments to learn more about MIS-C.
You can encourage your child to help stop the spread of COVID-19 by teaching them to do the same things everyone should do to stay healthy.
You can find additional information on preventing COVID-19 at How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others.
More information on Keeping Children Healthy during the COVID-19 Outbreak is available online.
No.
The symptoms of COVID-19 are similar in children and adults.
COVID-19 can look different in different people.
For many people, being sick with COVID-19 would be a little bit like having the flu.
People can get a fever, cough, or have a hard time taking deep breaths.
Most people who have gotten COVID-19 have not gotten very sick.
Only a small group of people who get it have had more serious problems.
CDC and partners are investigating cases of multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) associated with COVID-19.
Learn more about COVID-19 and multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C).
CDC recommends that everyone 2 years and older wear a mask that covers their nose and mouth in public settings when around people not living in your household, particularly where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain.
Masks should NOT be put on babies or children younger than 2 because of the danger of suffocation.
Children younger than 2 years of age are listed as an exception as well as anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Outbreaks can be stressful for adults and children.
When you talk with your child, try to stay calm, and reassure them that they are safe.
Talk to your children about COVID-19 and help them cope with stress.
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) is a condition where different body parts can become inflamed, including the heart, lungs, kidneys, brain, skin, eyes, or gastrointestinal organs.
We do not yet know what causes MIS-C.
However, we know that many children with MIS-C had the virus that causes COVID-19, or had been around someone with COVID-19.
MIS-C can be serious, even deadly, but most children who were diagnosed with this condition have gotten better with medical care.
Contact your childs doctor, nurse, or clinic right away if your child is showing symptoms of MIS-C. Seek emergency care right away if your child is showing any of these emergency warning signs of MIS-C or other concerning signs.
The key to slowing the spread of COVID-19 is to practice social distancing.
While school is out, children should not have in-person playdates with children from other households.
If children are playing outside their own homes, it is essential that they remain 6 feet from anyone who is not in their own household.
Some children with certain underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Make sure children practice everyday preventive behaviors, such as washing their hands often with soap and water.
Remember, if children meet outside of school in groups, it can put everyone at risk.
For more information, see Help Stop the Spread of COVID-19 in Children.
For more information, see Help Children Learn at Home.
Check with your school on plans to continue meal services during the school dismissal.
Many schools are keeping school facilities open to allow families to pick up meals or are providing grab-and-go meals at a central location.
For more information, see Keep Children Healthy during the COVID-19 Outbreak.
Older adults and people who have serious underlying medical conditions are at highest risk of getting sick from COVID-19.
Its not known yet whether all children with underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Although most COVID-19 cases in children are not severe, serious illness that needs to be treated at the hospital still happens.
Some data on children reported that the majority who needed hospitalization for COVID-19 had at least one underlying medical condition.
The most common underlying conditions reported among children with COVID-19 include chronic lung disease (including asthma), heart disease, and conditions that weaken the immune system.
This information suggests that children with these underlying medical conditions may be at risk for more severe illness from COVID-19.
More data are needed to learn which underlying or complex medical conditions may put children at increased risk.
CDC is monitoring new information as it becomes available and will provide updates as needed.
Learn more about caring for children with special health care needs during a disaster and people who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
In addition to following the recommendations to prevent getting sick and running essential errands, families should take extra steps recommended for persons with higher risk of severe COVID-19 illness and steps outlined for those with potential COVID-19 exposure or confirmed illness.
Helping children understand and follow recommendations, like social distancing and wearing masks, can be challenging if your child has intellectual disabilities, sensory issues, or other special healthcare needs.
Supporting children with special healthcare needs can put additional demands and stress on families, especially during emergency situations.
You have likely found ways to manage the stress and challenges unique to your familys situation.
It is important to continue your familys coping methods, including reaching out to other family members, friends, support groups, and organizations that have been helpful in the past.
See information on helping children cope and coping with stress (such as visiting parks, trails, or open spaces) and making your family stronger.
If you, or someone you care about, are feeling overwhelmed with emotions like sadness, depression, or anxiety, or feel like you want to harm yourself or others:
If your child with special healthcare needs becomes sick with symptoms of COVID-19, contact your childs healthcare provider.
If your child has new or worsening emergency warning signs, such as trouble breathing, pain or pressure in the chest, confusion or inability to wake them up, or bluish lips or face, call 911.
If you think your child may have COVID-19, notify the operator so that first responders may be appropriately prepared to protect themselves and others.
Notify your childs healthcare provider if someone else in your house becomes sick with COVID-19, so they can provide any advice specific for your child.
See additional information if someone in the home is sick with COVID-19 or suspected of having COVID-19.
If your childs healthcare provider tells you to go to the hospital for any health problem, including COVID-19
Create a household plan of action to help protect your health and the health of those you care about in the event of an outbreak of COVID-19 in your community:
Plan for potential changes at your workplace.
Talk to your employer about their emergency operations plan, including sick-leave policies and telework options.
Learn how businesses and employers can plan for and respond to COVID-19.
CDC does not encourage the production and use of homemade hand sanitizer products because of concerns over the correct use of the ingredientsexternal icon and the need to work under sterile conditions to make the product.
Local industries that are looking into producing hand sanitizer to fill in for commercial shortages can refer to the World Health Organization guidance.pdf iconexternal icon Organizations should revert to the use of commercially produced, FDA-approved product once such supplies again become available.
People with COVID-19 have reported a wide range of symptoms – from mild symptoms to severe illness.
Symptoms may appear 2-14 days after exposure to the virus.
If you have fever, cough, or other symptoms, you might have COVID-19.
Look for emergency warning signs* for COVID-19.
If someone is showing any of these signs, seek emergency medical care immediately
*This list is not all possible symptoms.
Please call your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 or call ahead to your local emergency facility: Notify the operator that you are seeking care for someone who has or may have COVID-19.
Yes.
It is possible to test positive for flu (as well as other respiratory infections) and COVID-19 at the same time.
Maybe; not everyone needs to be tested for COVID-19.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and want to get tested, call your healthcare provider first.
Most people will have mild illness and can recover at home without medical care and may not need to be tested.
CDC has guidance for who should be tested, but decisions about testing are made by state and local health departments and healthcare providers.
You can also visit your state or local health departments website to look for the latest local information on testing.
Decisions about testing are made by state and localexternal icon health departments or healthcare providers.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and are not tested, it is important to stay home.
What to do if you are sick.
COVID-19 testing differs by location.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and want to get tested, call your healthcare provider first.
You can also visit your state or localexternal icon health departments website to look for the latest local information on testing.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized viral tests that let you collect either a nasal swabexternal icon or a saliva sampleexternal icon at home.
However, you will still need to send your sample to a laboratory for analysis.
If you test positive for COVID-19, know what protective steps to take if you are sick or caring for someone.
If you test negative for COVID-19, you probably were not infected at the time your sample was collected.
However, that does not mean you will not get sick.
The test result only means that you did not have COVID-19 at the time of testing.
You might test negative if the sample was collected early in your infection and test positive later during your illness.
You could also be exposed to COVID-19 after the test and get infected then.
This means you could still spread the virus.
If you develop symptoms later, you might need another test to determine if you are infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.
For more information about viral tests, please visit Test for Current Infection.
Antibody tests for COVID-19 are available through healthcare providers and laboratories.
Check with your healthcare provider to see if they offer antibody tests and whether you should get one.
A positive test result shows you might have antibodies from an infection with the virus that causes COVID-19.
However, there is a chance a positive result means that you have antibodies from an infection with a virus from the same family of viruses (called coronaviruses), such as the one that causes the common cold.
Having antibodies to the virus that causes COVID-19 might provide protection from getting infected with the virus again.
If it does, we do not know how much protection the antibodies might provide or how long this protection might last.
You should continue to protect yourself and others since you could get infected with the virus again.
If you test negative, you might not have ever had COVID-19.
Talk with your healthcare provider about your test result and the type of test you took to understand what your result means.
Regardless of whether you test positive or negative, the results do not confirm whether or not you are able to spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
Until we know more, continue to take steps to protect yourself and others.
If you want more information about antibody tests, see Test for Past Infection.
Yes, it is possible.
You may test negative if the sample was collected early in your infection and test positive later during this illness.
You could also be exposed to COVID-19 after the test and get infected then.
Even if you test negative, you still should take steps to protect yourself and others.
See Testing for Current Infection for more information.
COVID-19 is a new disease and there is limited information regarding risk factors for severe disease.
Based on currently available information and clinical expertise, older adults and people with underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
If you are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19, you should:
Most people with disabilities are not inherently at higher risk for becoming infected with or having severe illness from COVID-19.
Some people with physical limitations or other disabilities might be at a higher risk of infection because of their underlying medical condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Contact tracing has been used for decades by state and local health departments to slow or stop the spread of infectious diseases.
Contact tracing slows the spread of COVID-19 by
During contact tracing, the health department staff will not ask you for
Discussions with health department staff are confidential.
This means that your personal and medical information will be kept private and only shared with those who may need to know, like your health care provider.
If you have been diagnosed with COVID-19, your name will not be shared with those you came in contact with.
The health department will only notify people you were in close contact with (within 6 feet for more than 15 minutes) that they might have been exposed to COVID-19.
Each state and jurisdiction use their own method for collecting and protecting health information.
To learn more, contact your state or local health department.
You may also be interested in: If I participate contact tracing for COVID-19 using a digital tool, is my personal health information secure?
For COVID-19, a close contact is anyone who was within 6 feet of an infected person for at least 15 minutes.
An infected person can spread COVID-19 starting 48 hours (or 2 days) before the person had any symptoms or tested positive for COVID-19.
Yes, you are still considered a close contact even if you were wearing a mask while you were around someone with COVID-19.
Masks are meant to protect other people in case you are infected, and not to protect you from becoming infected.
If you have been around someone who is sick with COVID-19, local authorities, the health department, or your doctor may recommend that you get tested for COVID-19.
The health department may be able to provide resources for testing in your area.
If you are diagnosed with COVID-19, someone from the health department may call you to check on your health, discuss who you have been around, and ask where you spent time while you may have been able to spread COVID-19 to others.
You will also be asked to continue to stay at home and self-isolate, away from others.
Watch for or monitor your symptoms of COVID-19.
If your symptoms worsen or become severe, you should seek medical care.
If you were around someone who has been diagnosed with COVID-19, someone from the health department may call you to let you know that you may have been exposed to COVID-19.
Stay home away from others for 14 days (self-quarantine) after your last contact with that person.
Health department staff will help identify the dates for your self-quarantine.
Health department staff can also provide resources for COVID-19 testing in your area.
Monitor your health and watch for symptoms of COVID-19.
Remember, symptoms may appear 2-14 days after you were exposed to COVID-19.
Tell the health department if you develop any symptoms.
Tell people you were around recently if you become ill, so they can monitor their health.
If your symptoms worsen or become severe, seek medical care.
Severe symptoms include trouble breathing, persistent pain or pressure in the chest, new confusion, inability to wake or stay awake, or bluish lips or face.
The health department staff will not ask you for
Yes.
You should still self-quarantine for 14 days since your last exposure.
It can take up to 14 days after exposure to the virus for a person to develop COVID-19 symptoms.
A negative result before end of the 14-day quarantine period does not rule out possible infection.
By self-quarantining for 14 days, you lower the chance of possibly exposing others to COVID-19.
People with COVID-19 can still spread the virus even if they dont have any symptoms.
If you were around someone who had COVID-19, it is critical that you stay home and away from others for 14 days from the last day that you were around that person.
Staying home and away from others at all times helps your health department in the fight against COVID-19 and helps protect you, your family, and your community.
If you have been around someone who was identified as a close contact to a person with COVID-19, closely monitor yourself for any symptoms of COVID-19.
You do not need to self-quarantine unless you develop symptoms or if the person identified as a close contact develops COVID-19.
No, there will not be a national app for contact tracing.
There are many options available now, and it is up to each state and individual to decide which tools best fit their needs.
Yes, if you agree to participate in contact tracing for COVID-19 with the health department, your information is secure.
Discussions with health department staff are confidential.
This means that your personal and medical information will be kept private and only shared with those who may need to know, like your health care provider.
Your name will not be shared with those you came in contact with.
If you have been diagnosed with COVID-19, the health department will only notify people you were in close contact with (within 6 feet for more than 15 minutes) that they might have been exposed to COVID-19.
Health departments may use case management tools to help make the contact tracing process more efficient.
If you choose to provide information through one of these tools, your information is secure and stored with the health department.
These tools also help health departments quickly receive and analyze information about COVID-19.
Case management tools are under the same laws and regulations for all sensitive health information use (e.g.
HIPPA).
You must provide consent for the health department to collect information using a case management tool.
Just like traditional contact tracing, digital tools will not collect information regarding money, Social Security numbers, bank account information, salary information, or credit card numbers.
Exposure notification tools may be an app that you can download on your personal cell phone.
If you choose to download an exposure notification app for COVID-19, your information is secure.
Exposure notification apps are developed in collaboration with or endorsed by health departments.
These apps undergo rigorous testing to determine their trustworthiness, security, and ability to protect peoples privacy.
Until you give consent to share information with your local health department, any information you have entered into the app is stored only on your personal phone.
Your information is stored only on your own phone and is not sent to the health department or any other third party.
The app and your information can be deleted any time.
When you consent to share your information with the local health department, your information is secure.
No, you are not required to download an app to give information for contact tracing for COVID-19.
Health departments commonly use case management tools to make the contact tracing process more efficient.
These types of tools are not downloaded on personal cell phones.
If you choose to give information to your local or state health department for contact tracing for COVID-19, you do not need to download an app on your cell phone.
The health department staff may call you to
It is up to you to decide if you download an exposure notification app for COVID-19.
There is currently no known risk associated with being in the same room at a funeral or visitation service with the body of someone who died of COVID-19.
See How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others to learn how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19, if you decide to attend a funeral or visitation.
COVID-19 is a new disease and we are still learning how it spreads.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
This type of spread is not a concern after death.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
This is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
People should consider not touching the body of someone who has died of COVID-19.
Older people and people of all ages with severe underlying health conditions are at higher risk of severe illness from COVID-19.
There may be less of a chance of the virus spreading from certain types of touching, such as holding the hand or hugging after the body has been prepared for viewing.
Other activities, such as kissing, washing, and shrouding should be avoided before, during, and after the body has been prepared, if possible.
If washing the body or shrouding are important religious or cultural practices, families are encouraged to work with their communitys cultural and religious leaders and funeral home staff on how to reduce their exposure as much as possible.
At a minimum, people conducting these activities should wear disposable gloves.
If splashing of fluids is expected, additional personal protective equipment (PPE) may be required (such as disposable gown, face shield, or goggles and N-95 respirator).
If desired, you may retrieve the belongings of a loved one who has died of COVID-19 outside their home (for example, in a hospital setting).
Depending on local rules and regulations, family members may retrieve these belongings at the funeral home or the healthcare facility.
You should use gloves and practice good hand hygiene when handling your loved ones belongings.
Depending on the type of belongings, such as electronics, you should also follow the household item-specific cleaning and disinfection guidelines when handling these items.
When a US citizen dies outside the United States, the deceased persons next of kin or legal representative should notify US consular officials at the Department of State.
Consular personnel are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, to provide assistance to US citizens for overseas emergencies.
If a family member, domestic partner, or legal representative is in a different country from the deceased person, he or she should call the Department of States Office of Overseas Citizens Services in Washington, DC, from 8 am to 5 pm Eastern time, Monday through Friday, at 888-407-4747 (toll-free) or 202-501-4444.
For emergency assistance after working hours or on weekends and holidays, call the Department of State switchboard at 202-647-4000 and ask to speak with the Overseas Citizens Services duty officer.
In addition, the US embassyexternal iconexternal iconexternal icon closest to or in the country where the US citizen died can provide assistance.
CDC does not require an autopsy before the remains of a person who died overseas are returned to the United States.
Depending on the circumstances surrounding the death, some countries may require an autopsy.
Sources of support to the family include the local consulate or embassy, travel insurance provider, tour operator, faith-based and aid organizations, and the deceaseds employer.
There likely will need to be an official identification of the body and official documents issued by the consular office.
CDC requirements for importing human remains depend upon if the body has been embalmed, cremated, or if the person died from a quarantinable communicable disease.
At this time, COVID-19 is a quarantinable communicable disease in the United States and the remains must meet the standards for importation found in 42 Code of Federal Regulations Part 71.55 and may be cleared, released, and authorized for entry into the United States only under the following conditions:
Please see CDCs guidance for additional information.
Cleaning with soap and water removes germs, dirt, and impurities from surfaces.
It lowers the risk of spreading infection.
Disinfecting kills germs on surfaces.
By killing germs on a surface after cleaning, it can further lower the risk of spreading infection.
The risk of transmitting or spreading SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, during vacuuming is unknown.
In order to reduce the need for cleaning, disinfection, and vacuuming, consider removing area rugs completely, if possible.
At this time, there are no reported cases of COVID-19 associated with vacuuming.
If vacuuming is necessary or required in a school, business, or community facility that was used by a person with suspected or confirmed COVID-19, first follow the CDC recommendations for Cleaning and Disinfection for Community Facilities that apply, which includes a wait time of 24 hours, or as long as practical.
After cleaning and disinfection, the following recommendations may help reduce the risk to workers and other individuals when vacuuming:
Routine cleaning is the everyday cleaning practices that businesses and communities normally use to maintain a healthy environment.
Surfaces frequently touched by multiple people, such as door handles, bathroom surfaces, and handrails, should be cleaned with soap and water or another detergent at least daily when facilities are in use.
More frequent cleaning and disinfection may be required based on level of use.
For example, certain surfaces and objects in public spaces, such as shopping carts and point of sale keypads, should be cleaned and disinfected before each use.
Cleaning removes dirt and impurities, including germs, from surfaces.
Cleaning alone does not kill germs, but it reduces the number of germs on a surface.
Cleaning does not kill germs, but by removing them, it lowers their numbers and the risk of spreading infection.
If a surface may have gotten the virus on it from a person with or suspected to have COVID-19, the surface should be cleaned and disinfected.
Disinfecting kills germs on surfaces.
Regular cleaning staff can clean and disinfect community spaces.
Cleaning staff should be trained on appropriate use of cleaning and disinfection chemicals and provided with the personal protective equipment (PPE) required for the chemicals used.
Companies do not necessarily need to close after a person with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 has been in a company facility.
The area(s) used or visited by the ill person should be closed for 24 hours or as long as possible.
Open outside doors and windows as much as possible ensuring that doing so does not pose a safety risk to children using the facility (i.e.
make sure that children are not able to enter the closed off area through any windows or doors).
and use ventilating fans to increase air circulation in the area.
Once the area has been appropriately disinfected, it can be opened for use.
Workers without close contact with the person with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 can return to work immediately after disinfection is completed.
The efficacy of these disinfection methods against the virus that causes COVID-19 is not known.
EPA only recommends use of the surface disinfectants identified on List Nexternal icon against the virus that causes COVID-19.
EPA does not routinely review the safety or efficacy of pesticidal devices, such as UV lights, LED lights, or ultrasonic devices.
Therefore, EPA cannot confirm whether, or under what circumstances, such products might be effective against the spread of COVID-19.
Outdoor areas generally require normal routine cleaning and do not require disinfection.
Spraying disinfectant on outdoor playgrounds is not an efficient use of disinfectant supplies and has not been proven to reduce the risk of COVID-19 to the public.
You should maintain existing cleaning and hygiene practices for outdoor areas.
If practical, high touch surfaces made of plastic or metal, such as grab bars and railings, should be cleaned routinely.
Cleaning and disinfection of wooden surfaces (e.g play structures, benches, tables) or groundcovers (e.g mulch, sand) is not recommended.
CDC does not recommend the use of sanitizing tunnels.
There is no evidence that they are effective in reducing the spread of COVID-19.
Chemicals used in sanitizing tunnels could cause skin, eye, or respiratory irritation or damage.
CDC does not recommend disinfection of sidewalks or roads.
Spraying disinfectant on sidewalks and roads is not an efficient use of disinfectant supplies and has not been proven to reduce the risk of COVID-19 to the public.
The risk of spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 from these surfaces is very low and disinfection is not effective on these surfaces.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
See If You Have Pets for more information about pets and COVID-19.
However, since animals can spread other diseases to people, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, such as washing your hands and maintaining good hygiene.
For more information on the many benefits of pet ownership, as well as staying safe and healthy around animals including pets, livestock, and wildlife, visit CDCs Healthy Pets, Healthy People website.
Although we know certain bacteria and fungi can be carried on fur and hair, there is no evidence that viruses, including the virus that causes COVID-19, can spread to people from the skin, fur, or hair of pets.
However, because animals can sometimes carry other germs that can make people sick, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, including washing hands before and after interacting with them.
Dog parks provide socialization and exercise for dogs, which is an important part of their wellbeing.
Because there is a risk that people with COVID-19 could spread it to animals, CDC recommends that you do not let pets interact with people outside of your household, especially in places with community spread of COVID-19.
Therefore, you should consider avoiding dog parks or other places where large numbers of people and dogs gather.
Some areas are allowing dog parks to open.
If you choose to go to a dog park, follow local guidelines.
There are ways to reduce the risk of you or your dog getting infected with COVID-19 if you go to a dog park.
See more information on pets and COVID-19 and recommendations for how to help keep your pet safe.
Until we know more about how this virus affects animals, CDC encourages pet owners to treat pets as you would other human family members to protect them from possible infection.
This means limiting contact between your pets and people outside your household as much as possible and avoiding places where large numbers of people gather.
Some areas are allowing groomers and boarding facilities such as dog daycares to open.
If you must take your pet to a groomer or boarding facility, follow any protocols put into place at the facility, such as wearing a mask and maintaining at least 6 feet of space between yourself and others if possible.
Limit pet items brought from home to the groomer or boarding facility, and disinfect any objects that are taken into a facility and returned home (such as leashes, bowls, and toys).
Use an EPA-registered disinfectantexternal icon to clean items and rinse thoroughly with clean water afterwards.
Do not wipe or bathe your pet with chemical disinfectants, alcohol, hydrogen peroxide, or other products, such as hand sanitizer, counter-cleaning wipes, or other industrial or surface cleaners.
If you have questions about appropriate products for bathing or cleaning your pet, talk to your veterinarian.
Do not put masks on pets, and do not take a sick pet to a groomer or boarding facility.
Signs of sickness in dogs may include fever, coughing, difficulty breathing or shortness of breath, lethargy, sneezing, discharge from the nose or eyes, vomiting, or diarrhea.
If you think your pet is sick, call your veterinarian.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
See more information on pets and COVID-19 and recommendations for how to help keep your pet safe.
Most pets that have gotten sick from the virus that causes COVID-19 were infected after close contact with a person with COVID-19.
Talk to your veterinarian about any health concerns you have about your pets.
If your pet gets sick after contact with a person with COVID-19, call your veterinarian and let them know the pet was around a person with COVID-19.
If you are sick with COVID-19, do not take your pet to the veterinary clinic yourself.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
Routine testing of animals for COVID-19 is not recommended at this time.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
However, it appears that the virus that causes COVID-19 can spread from people to animals after close contact with people with COVID-19.
Until we learn more about how this virus affects animals, use similar precautions for pets and other animals in your facility as you would for other people in your facility.
This will help protect both people and pets in your facility from COVID-19.
Talk to a veterinarian if a pet in your facility gets sick or if you have any concerns about the health of any pets in the facility.
If you think a pet in the facility was exposed to or is showing signs consistent with COVID-19, contact your state health official to discuss guidance on testing pets or other animals for the virus that causes COVID-19.
People who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 should avoid providing care for sick pets, if possible.
For more information, visit CDCs If You Have Pets webpage.
CDC does not have any evidence to suggest that imported animals or animal products pose a risk for spreading COVID-19 in the United States.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
CDC, the U. S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) play distinct but complementary roles in regulating the importation of live animals and animal products into the United States.
Please refer to CDCs requirements for bringing a dog to the United States.
The current requirements for rabies vaccination apply to dogs imported from high-risk countries for rabies.
Imported animals will need to meet CDC and USDAsexternal iconexternal icon requirements for entering the United States.
At this time, there is no evidence that companion animals, including pets and service animals, can spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
As with any animal introduced to a new environment, animals recently imported should be observed daily for signs of illness.
If an animal becomes ill, the animal should be examined by a veterinarian.
Call your local veterinary clinic before bringing the animal into the clinic and let them know that the animal was recently imported from another country.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
Currently, there is no evidence to suggest the virus that causes COVID-19 is circulating in free-living wildlife in the United States, or that wildlife might be a source of infection for people in the United States.
If a wild animal were to become infected with the virus, we dont know whether the infection could then spread among wildlife or if it could spread to other animals, including pets.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals, including wildlife, could be affected by COVID-19.
Because wildlife can carry other diseases, even without looking sick, it is always important to enjoy wildlife from a distance.
Take steps to prevent getting sick from wildlife in the United States:
See COVID-19 and Animals for more information.
Other coronaviruses have been found in North American bats in the past, but there is currently no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 is present in any free-living wildlife in the United States, including bats.
In general, coronaviruses do not cause illness or death in bats, but we dont yet know if this new coronavirus would make North American species of bats sick.
Bats are an important part of natural ecosystems, and their populations are already declining in the United States.
Bat populations could be further threatened by the disease itself or by harm inflicted on bats resulting from a misconception that bats are spreading COVID-19.
However, there is no evidence that bats in the United States are a source of the virus that causes COVID-19 for people.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how bats could be affected by COVID-19.
Currently, there is no evidence that you can get infected with the virus that causes COVID-19 by eating food, including wild hunted game meat.
However, hunters can get infected with other diseases when processing or eating game.
Hunters should always practice good hygiene when processing animals by following these food safety recommendations:
You should follow your state and/or local jurisdictional guidance regarding continuing operations at your facility.
There have not been any reports of horses testing positive for the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
COVID-19 is primarily spread from person to person, so steps should be taken to reduce the risks for people visiting your facility.
For more information, see Guidance on Preparing Workplaces for COVID-19pdf iconexternal icon and Interim Guidance for Businesses and Employers to Plan and Respond to Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Community mitigation is especially important before a vaccine or drug becomes widely available.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
Individual people, communities, schools, businesses, and healthcare organizations have a role to play in community mitigation.
Policies*, which include limits on large gatherings, restrictions on businesses, and school closures are often needed to fully put in place community mitigation strategies.
Each community is unique.
Because some actions can be very disruptive to daily life, mitigation activities will be different depending on how much disease has spread within the community, what the community population is like, and the ability to take these actions at the local level.
To identify appropriate activities, all parts of a community that might be affected need to be considered, including populations most vulnerable to severe illness, and those who might be more affected socially or economically.
When selecting mitigation activities, states and communities need to consider the spread of disease locally, characteristics of the people who live in the community (for example, age groups, languages spoken, overall health status), and the kind of public health resources and healthcare systems (like hospitals) that are available in the community.
State and local officials may need to adjust community mitigation activities and immediately take steps to scale them up or down depending on the changing local situation.
Putting mitigation into practice is based on
*CDC cannot address the policies of any business or organization.
CDC shares recommendations based on the best available science to help people make decisions that improve their health and safety.
In all cases, follow the guidance of your healthcare provider and local health department.
Local decisions depend on local circumstances.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
Currently there is no evidence that people can get COVID-19 by eating or handling food.
It may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object, such as a food package or dining ware that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
There is also no current evidence that people can get COVID-19 by drinking water.
The COVID-19 virus has not been detected in drinking water.
Conventional water treatment methods that use filtration and disinfection, such as those in most municipal drinking water systems, should remove or kill the virus that causes COVID-19.​ Learn more about food and COVID-19.
The virus that causes COVID-19 has not been detected in treated drinking water.
Water treatment plants use filters and disinfectants to remove or kill germs, like the virus that causes COVID-19.
The Environmental Protection Agency regulates water treatment plants to ensure that treated water is safe to drink.
Currently, there is no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 can be spread to people by drinking treated water.
COVID-19 is spread mainly through close contact from person-to-person.
You can continue to use and drink water from your tap as usual.
The virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in the feces of some patients diagnosed with COVID-19.
However, it is unclear whether the virus found in feces may be capable of causing COVID-19.
There has not been any confirmed report of the virus spreading from feces to a person.
Scientists also do not know how much risk there is that the virus could be spread from the feces of an infected person to another person.
However, they think this risk is low based on data from previous outbreaks of diseases caused by related coronaviruses, such as severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS).
Recently, ribonucleic acid (RNA) from the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater, and no information to date that anyone has become sick with COVID-19 because of exposure to wastewater.
At this time, the risk of transmission of the virus that causes COVID-19 through properly designed and maintained sewerage systems is thought to be low.
Recently, ribonucleic acid (RNA) from the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater, and no information to date that anyone has become sick with COVID-19 because of exposure to wastewater.
Standard practices associated with wastewater treatment plant operations should be sufficient to protect wastewater workers from the virus that causes COVID-19.
These standard practices can include engineering and administrative controls, hygiene precautions, specific safe work practices, and personal protective equipment (PPE) normally required when handling untreated wastewater.
No additional COVID-19–specific protections are recommended for workers involved in wastewater management, including those at wastewater treatment facilities.
See Information for Wastewater and Sanitation System Workers on COVID-19 for additional information.
In most cases, it is safe to wash your hands with soap and tap water during a Boil Water Advisory.
Follow the guidance from your local public health officials.
If soap and water are not available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in pools, hot tubs, or water playgrounds.
Plus, proper operation of public pools, hot tubs, and water playgrounds (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) and disinfection of the water (with chlorine or bromine) should inactivate the virus.
The virus mainly spreads when respiratory droplets from infected people land in the mouths or noses of others or possibly when inhaled into the lungs by others.
If a public pool, hot tub, or water playground is open, it is important for all visitors and staff to take steps to slow the spread of the virus:
See Considerations for Public Pools, Hot Tubs, and Water Playgrounds for more information.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in pools, including saltwater pools.
Plus, proper operation of public pools (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) and disinfection of the water (with chlorine or bromine) should inactivate the virus.
Saltwater pools are chlorinated pools.
In traditional pools, chlorine products (such as granules or liquid bleach) are added to the water to disinfect it.
In saltwater pools, table salt (made up of sodium and chloride) is added to the water, and an electrical current is then run through the water with dissolved salt.
This creates the same disinfecting form of chlorine that is created when chlorine products are added to the water in traditional pools.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in lakes, oceans, rivers, or other natural bodies of water.
The virus mainly spreads when respiratory droplets from infected people land in the mouths or noses of others or possibly when inhaled into the lungs by others.
If a public beach or other swim area in a natural body of water is open, it is important for all visitors and staff to take steps to slow the spread of the virus:
See Considerations for Public Beaches for more information.
RNAexternal icon of the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater, which can come from combined sewer overflowsexternal icon (rainwater runoff, domestic sewage, and industrial wastewater) and other sourcesexternal icon (such as, leaking septic tanks or animal waste from farms nearby) and enter swim areas.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater.
Plus, CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus being spread by swallowing or coming in contact with water contaminated by feces (poop) from an infected person.
At lakes, oceans, and rivers with routine water quality monitoring programs, staff look for changes in fecal (poop) contamination of the water.
Water quality advisories and beach closures alert the public to avoid getting in or on the water because of increased fecal contamination.
Learn more about healthy swimming in natural bodies of water and access water quality information by state.
No, do NOT wear a cloth mask in the water.
It can be difficult to breathe through a cloth mask when it is wet.
Plus, wet cloth masks dont slow the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19 as well as dry cloth masks.
All of this means it is particularly important to stay at least 6 feet apart in the water from people you dont live with.
In case cloth masks do get wet by mistake, bring a second (or extra) cloth mask for everyone heading out to the public pool or beach.
CDC does not yet have evidence on the effectiveness of different types of cloth materials.
Wearing cloth masks can help prevent people infected with the virus that causes COVID-19 from spreading the virus.
Make sure your cloth mask:
Cloth masks should NOT be worn by children less than 2 years old or anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Learn more about how to wear, take off, and wash your cloth masks.
The design of the public pool, hot tub, or water playground and surrounding deck and if visitors live together or not will affect how many people can stay at least 6 feet apart from those they dont live with.
CDC recommends operators of public pools, hot tubs, and water playgrounds:
Operators might want to limit the number of people in and around the water so if the water needs to be evacuated (because of lightning or other health or safety threat) social distancing can be maintained on the deck.
Otherwise, if the water is evacuated and social distancing cannot be maintained on the deck, close the deck to visitors.
There is no standard formula to determine how many people can maintain social distancing in the water and on the surrounding deck.
See Considerations for Public Pools, Hot Tubs, and Water Playgrounds for more information.
No.
Only List N disinfectants approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agencyexternal icon should be used to disinfect surfaces (such as handrails and in bathrooms) and shared objects (such as kickboards and pool noodles).
The list includes hundreds of disinfectants.
Operators of public pools, hot tubs, or water playgrounds (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) should consult with the design company or engineer to determine which disinfectants are best suited for surfaces and with manufacturers to determine which disinfectants are best suited for shared objects.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectants.
We dont know yet.
Early scientific data suggest that SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, can be inactivated by the suns UV light.
However, the ability of the suns UV light to inactivate the virus on surfaces (such as handrails and in bathrooms) and shared objects (such as kickboards and pool noodles) needs more research.
Factors — such as cloudiness, latitude (distance from equator), time of day, and amount of time exposed to the suns UV light — will determine how effectively the virus is inactivated.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectantsexternal icon.
The more frequently a surface is touched by multiple people, the more frequently it should be cleaned and then disinfected with a List N disinfectant approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agencyexternal icon.
Frequently touched surfaces should be cleaned and disinfected at least daily.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectants.
No.
RNAexternal icon of the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in feces (poop).
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in feces.
Plus, CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus being spread by swallowing or coming in contact with water contaminated by feces from an infected person.
As a result, CDC has not changed its fecal incident response recommendations.
Remember, do NOT vacuum feces out of the water.
Not when lifeguards are actively lifeguarding.
Lifeguards actively lifeguarding should not be doing other tasks that could distract them.
Drowning deaths have resulted, at least in part, from lifeguards being distracted.
Drowning can occur quickly and quietly.
Learn and take steps to prevent drowning.
Lifeguard trainers can consider the following steps to slow the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19:
CDC has more COVID-19–related considerations for public pools and public beaches and non-COVID-19–related healthy and safe swimming resources.
Help control the spread of rumors and be aware of fraud schemes.
1Fever may be subjective or confirmed
2Close contact is defined as—
a) being within approximately 6 feet (2 meters) of a COVID-19 case for a prolonged period of time; close contact can occur while caring for, living with, visiting, or sharing a health care waiting area or room with a COVID-19 case
b) having direct contact with infectious secretions of a COVID-19 case (e.g being coughed on)
If such contact occurs while not wearing recommended personal protective equipment or PPE (e.g gowns, gloves, NIOSH-certified disposable N95 respirator, eye protection), criteria for PUI consideration are met
See CDCs updated Interim Healthcare Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Persons Under Investigation for 2019 Novel Coronavirus.
Data to inform the definition of close contact are limited.
Considerations when assessing close contact include the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk) and the clinical symptoms of the person with COVID-19 (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk as does exposure to a severely ill patient).
Special consideration should be given to those exposed in health care settings.
A novel coronavirus is a new coronavirus that has not been previously identified.
The virus causing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), is not the same as the coronaviruses that commonly circulate among humans and cause mild illness, like the common cold.
On February 11, 2020 the World Health Organization announced an official name for the disease that is causing the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak, first identified in Wuhan China.
The new name of this disease is coronavirus disease 2019, abbreviated as COVID-19.
In COVID-19, ‘CO stands for ‘corona, ‘VI for ‘virus, and ‘D for disease.
Formerly, this disease was referred to as 2019 novel coronavirus or 2019-nCoV.
There are many types of human coronaviruses including some that commonly cause mild upper-respiratory tract illnesses.
COVID-19 is a new disease, caused by a novel (or new) coronavirus that has not previously been seen in humans.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person to person, mainly through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
Spread is more likely when people are in close contact with one another (within about 6 feet).
COVID-19 seems to be spreading easily and sustainably in the community (community spread) in many affected geographic areas.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
It is not yet known whether weather and temperature affect the spread of COVID-19.
Some other viruses, like those that cause the common cold and flu, spread more during cold weather months but that does not mean it is impossible to become sick with these viruses during other months.
There is much more to learn about the transmissibility, severity, and other features associated with COVID-19 and investigations are ongoing.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Each health department determines community spread differently based on local conditions.
For information on community spread in your area, please visit your health departments website.​
At this time, CDC has no data to suggest that this new coronavirus or other similar coronaviruses are spread by mosquitoes or ticks.
The main way that COVID-19 spreads is from person to person.
See How Coronavirus Spreads for more information.
Visit the How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others page to learn about how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19.
Wear masks in public settings when around people not living in your household and particularly where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, such as grocery stores, pharmacies, and gas stations.
Masks may slow the spread of the virus and help people who may have the virus and do not know it from transmitting it to others.
COVID-19 can be spread by people who do not have symptoms and do not know that they are infected.
Thats why its important for everyone to practice social distancing (staying at least 6 feet away from other people) and wear masks in public settings.
Masks provide an extra layer to help prevent the respiratory droplets from traveling in the air and onto other people.
The masks recommended are not surgical masks or N-95 respirators.
Those are critical supplies that must continue to be reserved for healthcare workers and other medical first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
More information about masks can be found on our masks site.
For more information, see Groups at Higher Risk for Severe Illness.
There is still a lot that is unknown about COVID-19 and how it spreads.
Coronaviruses are thought to be spread most often by respiratory droplets.
Although the virus can survive for a short period on some surfaces, it is unlikely to be spread from domestic or international mail, products or packaging.
However, it may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Learn more about safe handling of deliveries and mail.
In healthcare settings across the United States, donated blood is a lifesaving, essential part of caring for patients.
The need for donated blood is constant, and blood centers are open and in urgent need of donations.
CDC encourages people who are well to continue to donate blood if they are able, even if they are practicing social distancing because of COVID-19.
CDC is supporting blood centers by providing recommendations that will keep donors and staff safe.
Examples of these recommendations include spacing donor chairs 6 feet apart, thoroughly adhering to environmental cleaning practices, and encouraging donors to make donation appointments ahead of time.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Handwashing is one of the best ways to protect yourself and your family from getting sick.
Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing; going to the bathroom; and before eating or preparing food.
If soap and water are not readily available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces such as tables, doorknobs, light switches, countertops, handles, desks, phones, keyboards, toilets, faucets, and sinks.
If surfaces are dirty, clean them using detergent or soap and water prior to disinfection.
To disinfect, most common EPA-registered household disinfectants will work.
See CDCs recommendations for household cleaning and disinfection.
Most people who get COVID-19 will be able to recover at home.
CDC has directions for people who are recovering at home and their caregivers, including:
However, some people may need emergency medical attention.
Watch for symptoms and learn when to seek emergency medical attention.
When to Seek Emergency Medical Attention
Look for emergency warning signs* for COVID-19.
If someone is showing any of these signs, seek emergency medical care immediately
*This list is not all possible symptoms.
Please call your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 or call ahead to your local emergency facility: Notify the operator that you are seeking care for someone who has or may have COVID-19.
Based on available evidence, children do not appear to be at higher risk for COVID-19 than adults.
While some children and infants have been sick with COVID-19, adults make up most of the known cases to date.
However, a few children have developed multisystem inflammatory syndrome (MIS-C).
Currently, information about this syndrome is limited.
CDC is working with state and local health departments to learn more about MIS-C.
You can encourage your child to help stop the spread of COVID-19 by teaching them to do the same things everyone should do to stay healthy.
You can find additional information on preventing COVID-19 at How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others.
More information on Keeping Children Healthy during the COVID-19 Outbreak is available online.
No.
The symptoms of COVID-19 are similar in children and adults.
COVID-19 can look different in different people.
For many people, being sick with COVID-19 would be a little bit like having the flu.
People can get a fever, cough, or have a hard time taking deep breaths.
Most people who have gotten COVID-19 have not gotten very sick.
Only a small group of people who get it have had more serious problems.
CDC and partners are investigating cases of multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) associated with COVID-19.
Learn more about COVID-19 and multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C).
CDC recommends that everyone 2 years and older wear a mask that covers their nose and mouth in public settings when around people not living in your household, particularly where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain.
Masks should NOT be put on babies or children younger than 2 because of the danger of suffocation.
Children younger than 2 years of age are listed as an exception as well as anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Outbreaks can be stressful for adults and children.
When you talk with your child, try to stay calm, and reassure them that they are safe.
Talk to your children about COVID-19 and help them cope with stress.
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) is a condition where different body parts can become inflamed, including the heart, lungs, kidneys, brain, skin, eyes, or gastrointestinal organs.
We do not yet know what causes MIS-C.
However, we know that many children with MIS-C had the virus that causes COVID-19, or had been around someone with COVID-19.
MIS-C can be serious, even deadly, but most children who were diagnosed with this condition have gotten better with medical care.
Contact your childs doctor, nurse, or clinic right away if your child is showing symptoms of MIS-C. Seek emergency care right away if your child is showing any of these emergency warning signs of MIS-C or other concerning signs.
The key to slowing the spread of COVID-19 is to practice social distancing.
While school is out, children should not have in-person playdates with children from other households.
If children are playing outside their own homes, it is essential that they remain 6 feet from anyone who is not in their own household.
Some children with certain underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Make sure children practice everyday preventive behaviors, such as washing their hands often with soap and water.
Remember, if children meet outside of school in groups, it can put everyone at risk.
For more information, see Help Stop the Spread of COVID-19 in Children.
For more information, see Help Children Learn at Home.
Check with your school on plans to continue meal services during the school dismissal.
Many schools are keeping school facilities open to allow families to pick up meals or are providing grab-and-go meals at a central location.
For more information, see Keep Children Healthy during the COVID-19 Outbreak.
Older adults and people who have serious underlying medical conditions are at highest risk of getting sick from COVID-19.
Its not known yet whether all children with underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Although most COVID-19 cases in children are not severe, serious illness that needs to be treated at the hospital still happens.
Some data on children reported that the majority who needed hospitalization for COVID-19 had at least one underlying medical condition.
The most common underlying conditions reported among children with COVID-19 include chronic lung disease (including asthma), heart disease, and conditions that weaken the immune system.
This information suggests that children with these underlying medical conditions may be at risk for more severe illness from COVID-19.
More data are needed to learn which underlying or complex medical conditions may put children at increased risk.
CDC is monitoring new information as it becomes available and will provide updates as needed.
Learn more about caring for children with special health care needs during a disaster and people who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
In addition to following the recommendations to prevent getting sick and running essential errands, families should take extra steps recommended for persons with higher risk of severe COVID-19 illness and steps outlined for those with potential COVID-19 exposure or confirmed illness.
Helping children understand and follow recommendations, like social distancing and wearing masks, can be challenging if your child has intellectual disabilities, sensory issues, or other special healthcare needs.
Supporting children with special healthcare needs can put additional demands and stress on families, especially during emergency situations.
You have likely found ways to manage the stress and challenges unique to your familys situation.
It is important to continue your familys coping methods, including reaching out to other family members, friends, support groups, and organizations that have been helpful in the past.
See information on helping children cope and coping with stress (such as visiting parks, trails, or open spaces) and making your family stronger.
If you, or someone you care about, are feeling overwhelmed with emotions like sadness, depression, or anxiety, or feel like you want to harm yourself or others:
If your child with special healthcare needs becomes sick with symptoms of COVID-19, contact your childs healthcare provider.
If your child has new or worsening emergency warning signs, such as trouble breathing, pain or pressure in the chest, confusion or inability to wake them up, or bluish lips or face, call 911.
If you think your child may have COVID-19, notify the operator so that first responders may be appropriately prepared to protect themselves and others.
Notify your childs healthcare provider if someone else in your house becomes sick with COVID-19, so they can provide any advice specific for your child.
See additional information if someone in the home is sick with COVID-19 or suspected of having COVID-19.
If your childs healthcare provider tells you to go to the hospital for any health problem, including COVID-19
Create a household plan of action to help protect your health and the health of those you care about in the event of an outbreak of COVID-19 in your community:
Plan for potential changes at your workplace.
Talk to your employer about their emergency operations plan, including sick-leave policies and telework options.
Learn how businesses and employers can plan for and respond to COVID-19.
CDC does not encourage the production and use of homemade hand sanitizer products because of concerns over the correct use of the ingredientsexternal icon and the need to work under sterile conditions to make the product.
Local industries that are looking into producing hand sanitizer to fill in for commercial shortages can refer to the World Health Organization guidance.pdf iconexternal icon Organizations should revert to the use of commercially produced, FDA-approved product once such supplies again become available.
People with COVID-19 have reported a wide range of symptoms – from mild symptoms to severe illness.
Symptoms may appear 2-14 days after exposure to the virus.
If you have fever, cough, or other symptoms, you might have COVID-19.
Look for emergency warning signs* for COVID-19.
If someone is showing any of these signs, seek emergency medical care immediately
*This list is not all possible symptoms.
Please call your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 or call ahead to your local emergency facility: Notify the operator that you are seeking care for someone who has or may have COVID-19.
Yes.
It is possible to test positive for flu (as well as other respiratory infections) and COVID-19 at the same time.
Maybe; not everyone needs to be tested for COVID-19.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and want to get tested, call your healthcare provider first.
Most people will have mild illness and can recover at home without medical care and may not need to be tested.
CDC has guidance for who should be tested, but decisions about testing are made by state and local health departments and healthcare providers.
You can also visit your state or local health departments website to look for the latest local information on testing.
Decisions about testing are made by state and localexternal icon health departments or healthcare providers.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and are not tested, it is important to stay home.
What to do if you are sick.
COVID-19 testing differs by location.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and want to get tested, call your healthcare provider first.
You can also visit your state or localexternal icon health departments website to look for the latest local information on testing.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized viral tests that let you collect either a nasal swabexternal icon or a saliva sampleexternal icon at home.
However, you will still need to send your sample to a laboratory for analysis.
If you test positive for COVID-19, know what protective steps to take if you are sick or caring for someone.
If you test negative for COVID-19, you probably were not infected at the time your sample was collected.
However, that does not mean you will not get sick.
The test result only means that you did not have COVID-19 at the time of testing.
You might test negative if the sample was collected early in your infection and test positive later during your illness.
You could also be exposed to COVID-19 after the test and get infected then.
This means you could still spread the virus.
If you develop symptoms later, you might need another test to determine if you are infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.
For more information about viral tests, please visit Test for Current Infection.
Antibody tests for COVID-19 are available through healthcare providers and laboratories.
Check with your healthcare provider to see if they offer antibody tests and whether you should get one.
A positive test result shows you might have antibodies from an infection with the virus that causes COVID-19.
However, there is a chance a positive result means that you have antibodies from an infection with a virus from the same family of viruses (called coronaviruses), such as the one that causes the common cold.
Having antibodies to the virus that causes COVID-19 might provide protection from getting infected with the virus again.
If it does, we do not know how much protection the antibodies might provide or how long this protection might last.
You should continue to protect yourself and others since you could get infected with the virus again.
If you test negative, you might not have ever had COVID-19.
Talk with your healthcare provider about your test result and the type of test you took to understand what your result means.
Regardless of whether you test positive or negative, the results do not confirm whether or not you are able to spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
Until we know more, continue to take steps to protect yourself and others.
If you want more information about antibody tests, see Test for Past Infection.
Yes, it is possible.
You may test negative if the sample was collected early in your infection and test positive later during this illness.
You could also be exposed to COVID-19 after the test and get infected then.
Even if you test negative, you still should take steps to protect yourself and others.
See Testing for Current Infection for more information.
COVID-19 is a new disease and there is limited information regarding risk factors for severe disease.
Based on currently available information and clinical expertise, older adults and people with underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
If you are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19, you should:
Most people with disabilities are not inherently at higher risk for becoming infected with or having severe illness from COVID-19.
Some people with physical limitations or other disabilities might be at a higher risk of infection because of their underlying medical condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Contact tracing has been used for decades by state and local health departments to slow or stop the spread of infectious diseases.
Contact tracing slows the spread of COVID-19 by
During contact tracing, the health department staff will not ask you for
Discussions with health department staff are confidential.
This means that your personal and medical information will be kept private and only shared with those who may need to know, like your health care provider.
If you have been diagnosed with COVID-19, your name will not be shared with those you came in contact with.
The health department will only notify people you were in close contact with (within 6 feet for more than 15 minutes) that they might have been exposed to COVID-19.
Each state and jurisdiction use their own method for collecting and protecting health information.
To learn more, contact your state or local health department.
You may also be interested in: If I participate contact tracing for COVID-19 using a digital tool, is my personal health information secure?
For COVID-19, a close contact is anyone who was within 6 feet of an infected person for at least 15 minutes.
An infected person can spread COVID-19 starting 48 hours (or 2 days) before the person had any symptoms or tested positive for COVID-19.
Yes, you are still considered a close contact even if you were wearing a mask while you were around someone with COVID-19.
Masks are meant to protect other people in case you are infected, and not to protect you from becoming infected.
If you have been around someone who is sick with COVID-19, local authorities, the health department, or your doctor may recommend that you get tested for COVID-19.
The health department may be able to provide resources for testing in your area.
If you are diagnosed with COVID-19, someone from the health department may call you to check on your health, discuss who you have been around, and ask where you spent time while you may have been able to spread COVID-19 to others.
You will also be asked to continue to stay at home and self-isolate, away from others.
Watch for or monitor your symptoms of COVID-19.
If your symptoms worsen or become severe, you should seek medical care.
If you were around someone who has been diagnosed with COVID-19, someone from the health department may call you to let you know that you may have been exposed to COVID-19.
Stay home away from others for 14 days (self-quarantine) after your last contact with that person.
Health department staff will help identify the dates for your self-quarantine.
Health department staff can also provide resources for COVID-19 testing in your area.
Monitor your health and watch for symptoms of COVID-19.
Remember, symptoms may appear 2-14 days after you were exposed to COVID-19.
Tell the health department if you develop any symptoms.
Tell people you were around recently if you become ill, so they can monitor their health.
If your symptoms worsen or become severe, seek medical care.
Severe symptoms include trouble breathing, persistent pain or pressure in the chest, new confusion, inability to wake or stay awake, or bluish lips or face.
The health department staff will not ask you for
Yes.
You should still self-quarantine for 14 days since your last exposure.
It can take up to 14 days after exposure to the virus for a person to develop COVID-19 symptoms.
A negative result before end of the 14-day quarantine period does not rule out possible infection.
By self-quarantining for 14 days, you lower the chance of possibly exposing others to COVID-19.
People with COVID-19 can still spread the virus even if they dont have any symptoms.
If you were around someone who had COVID-19, it is critical that you stay home and away from others for 14 days from the last day that you were around that person.
Staying home and away from others at all times helps your health department in the fight against COVID-19 and helps protect you, your family, and your community.
If you have been around someone who was identified as a close contact to a person with COVID-19, closely monitor yourself for any symptoms of COVID-19.
You do not need to self-quarantine unless you develop symptoms or if the person identified as a close contact develops COVID-19.
No, there will not be a national app for contact tracing.
There are many options available now, and it is up to each state and individual to decide which tools best fit their needs.
Yes, if you agree to participate in contact tracing for COVID-19 with the health department, your information is secure.
Discussions with health department staff are confidential.
This means that your personal and medical information will be kept private and only shared with those who may need to know, like your health care provider.
Your name will not be shared with those you came in contact with.
If you have been diagnosed with COVID-19, the health department will only notify people you were in close contact with (within 6 feet for more than 15 minutes) that they might have been exposed to COVID-19.
Health departments may use case management tools to help make the contact tracing process more efficient.
If you choose to provide information through one of these tools, your information is secure and stored with the health department.
These tools also help health departments quickly receive and analyze information about COVID-19.
Case management tools are under the same laws and regulations for all sensitive health information use (e.g.
HIPPA).
You must provide consent for the health department to collect information using a case management tool.
Just like traditional contact tracing, digital tools will not collect information regarding money, Social Security numbers, bank account information, salary information, or credit card numbers.
Exposure notification tools may be an app that you can download on your personal cell phone.
If you choose to download an exposure notification app for COVID-19, your information is secure.
Exposure notification apps are developed in collaboration with or endorsed by health departments.
These apps undergo rigorous testing to determine their trustworthiness, security, and ability to protect peoples privacy.
Until you give consent to share information with your local health department, any information you have entered into the app is stored only on your personal phone.
Your information is stored only on your own phone and is not sent to the health department or any other third party.
The app and your information can be deleted any time.
When you consent to share your information with the local health department, your information is secure.
No, you are not required to download an app to give information for contact tracing for COVID-19.
Health departments commonly use case management tools to make the contact tracing process more efficient.
These types of tools are not downloaded on personal cell phones.
If you choose to give information to your local or state health department for contact tracing for COVID-19, you do not need to download an app on your cell phone.
The health department staff may call you to
It is up to you to decide if you download an exposure notification app for COVID-19.
There is currently no known risk associated with being in the same room at a funeral or visitation service with the body of someone who died of COVID-19.
See How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others to learn how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19, if you decide to attend a funeral or visitation.
COVID-19 is a new disease and we are still learning how it spreads.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
This type of spread is not a concern after death.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
This is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
People should consider not touching the body of someone who has died of COVID-19.
Older people and people of all ages with severe underlying health conditions are at higher risk of severe illness from COVID-19.
There may be less of a chance of the virus spreading from certain types of touching, such as holding the hand or hugging after the body has been prepared for viewing.
Other activities, such as kissing, washing, and shrouding should be avoided before, during, and after the body has been prepared, if possible.
If washing the body or shrouding are important religious or cultural practices, families are encouraged to work with their communitys cultural and religious leaders and funeral home staff on how to reduce their exposure as much as possible.
At a minimum, people conducting these activities should wear disposable gloves.
If splashing of fluids is expected, additional personal protective equipment (PPE) may be required (such as disposable gown, face shield, or goggles and N-95 respirator).
If desired, you may retrieve the belongings of a loved one who has died of COVID-19 outside their home (for example, in a hospital setting).
Depending on local rules and regulations, family members may retrieve these belongings at the funeral home or the healthcare facility.
You should use gloves and practice good hand hygiene when handling your loved ones belongings.
Depending on the type of belongings, such as electronics, you should also follow the household item-specific cleaning and disinfection guidelines when handling these items.
When a US citizen dies outside the United States, the deceased persons next of kin or legal representative should notify US consular officials at the Department of State.
Consular personnel are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, to provide assistance to US citizens for overseas emergencies.
If a family member, domestic partner, or legal representative is in a different country from the deceased person, he or she should call the Department of States Office of Overseas Citizens Services in Washington, DC, from 8 am to 5 pm Eastern time, Monday through Friday, at 888-407-4747 (toll-free) or 202-501-4444.
For emergency assistance after working hours or on weekends and holidays, call the Department of State switchboard at 202-647-4000 and ask to speak with the Overseas Citizens Services duty officer.
In addition, the US embassyexternal iconexternal iconexternal icon closest to or in the country where the US citizen died can provide assistance.
CDC does not require an autopsy before the remains of a person who died overseas are returned to the United States.
Depending on the circumstances surrounding the death, some countries may require an autopsy.
Sources of support to the family include the local consulate or embassy, travel insurance provider, tour operator, faith-based and aid organizations, and the deceaseds employer.
There likely will need to be an official identification of the body and official documents issued by the consular office.
CDC requirements for importing human remains depend upon if the body has been embalmed, cremated, or if the person died from a quarantinable communicable disease.
At this time, COVID-19 is a quarantinable communicable disease in the United States and the remains must meet the standards for importation found in 42 Code of Federal Regulations Part 71.55 and may be cleared, released, and authorized for entry into the United States only under the following conditions:
Please see CDCs guidance for additional information.
Cleaning with soap and water removes germs, dirt, and impurities from surfaces.
It lowers the risk of spreading infection.
Disinfecting kills germs on surfaces.
By killing germs on a surface after cleaning, it can further lower the risk of spreading infection.
The risk of transmitting or spreading SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, during vacuuming is unknown.
In order to reduce the need for cleaning, disinfection, and vacuuming, consider removing area rugs completely, if possible.
At this time, there are no reported cases of COVID-19 associated with vacuuming.
If vacuuming is necessary or required in a school, business, or community facility that was used by a person with suspected or confirmed COVID-19, first follow the CDC recommendations for Cleaning and Disinfection for Community Facilities that apply, which includes a wait time of 24 hours, or as long as practical.
After cleaning and disinfection, the following recommendations may help reduce the risk to workers and other individuals when vacuuming:
Routine cleaning is the everyday cleaning practices that businesses and communities normally use to maintain a healthy environment.
Surfaces frequently touched by multiple people, such as door handles, bathroom surfaces, and handrails, should be cleaned with soap and water or another detergent at least daily when facilities are in use.
More frequent cleaning and disinfection may be required based on level of use.
For example, certain surfaces and objects in public spaces, such as shopping carts and point of sale keypads, should be cleaned and disinfected before each use.
Cleaning removes dirt and impurities, including germs, from surfaces.
Cleaning alone does not kill germs, but it reduces the number of germs on a surface.
Cleaning does not kill germs, but by removing them, it lowers their numbers and the risk of spreading infection.
If a surface may have gotten the virus on it from a person with or suspected to have COVID-19, the surface should be cleaned and disinfected.
Disinfecting kills germs on surfaces.
Regular cleaning staff can clean and disinfect community spaces.
Cleaning staff should be trained on appropriate use of cleaning and disinfection chemicals and provided with the personal protective equipment (PPE) required for the chemicals used.
Companies do not necessarily need to close after a person with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 has been in a company facility.
The area(s) used or visited by the ill person should be closed for 24 hours or as long as possible.
Open outside doors and windows as much as possible ensuring that doing so does not pose a safety risk to children using the facility (i.e.
make sure that children are not able to enter the closed off area through any windows or doors).
and use ventilating fans to increase air circulation in the area.
Once the area has been appropriately disinfected, it can be opened for use.
Workers without close contact with the person with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 can return to work immediately after disinfection is completed.
The efficacy of these disinfection methods against the virus that causes COVID-19 is not known.
EPA only recommends use of the surface disinfectants identified on List Nexternal icon against the virus that causes COVID-19.
EPA does not routinely review the safety or efficacy of pesticidal devices, such as UV lights, LED lights, or ultrasonic devices.
Therefore, EPA cannot confirm whether, or under what circumstances, such products might be effective against the spread of COVID-19.
Outdoor areas generally require normal routine cleaning and do not require disinfection.
Spraying disinfectant on outdoor playgrounds is not an efficient use of disinfectant supplies and has not been proven to reduce the risk of COVID-19 to the public.
You should maintain existing cleaning and hygiene practices for outdoor areas.
If practical, high touch surfaces made of plastic or metal, such as grab bars and railings, should be cleaned routinely.
Cleaning and disinfection of wooden surfaces (e.g play structures, benches, tables) or groundcovers (e.g mulch, sand) is not recommended.
CDC does not recommend the use of sanitizing tunnels.
There is no evidence that they are effective in reducing the spread of COVID-19.
Chemicals used in sanitizing tunnels could cause skin, eye, or respiratory irritation or damage.
CDC does not recommend disinfection of sidewalks or roads.
Spraying disinfectant on sidewalks and roads is not an efficient use of disinfectant supplies and has not been proven to reduce the risk of COVID-19 to the public.
The risk of spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 from these surfaces is very low and disinfection is not effective on these surfaces.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
See If You Have Pets for more information about pets and COVID-19.
However, since animals can spread other diseases to people, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, such as washing your hands and maintaining good hygiene.
For more information on the many benefits of pet ownership, as well as staying safe and healthy around animals including pets, livestock, and wildlife, visit CDCs Healthy Pets, Healthy People website.
Although we know certain bacteria and fungi can be carried on fur and hair, there is no evidence that viruses, including the virus that causes COVID-19, can spread to people from the skin, fur, or hair of pets.
However, because animals can sometimes carry other germs that can make people sick, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, including washing hands before and after interacting with them.
Dog parks provide socialization and exercise for dogs, which is an important part of their wellbeing.
Because there is a risk that people with COVID-19 could spread it to animals, CDC recommends that you do not let pets interact with people outside of your household, especially in places with community spread of COVID-19.
Therefore, you should consider avoiding dog parks or other places where large numbers of people and dogs gather.
Some areas are allowing dog parks to open.
If you choose to go to a dog park, follow local guidelines.
There are ways to reduce the risk of you or your dog getting infected with COVID-19 if you go to a dog park.
See more information on pets and COVID-19 and recommendations for how to help keep your pet safe.
Until we know more about how this virus affects animals, CDC encourages pet owners to treat pets as you would other human family members to protect them from possible infection.
This means limiting contact between your pets and people outside your household as much as possible and avoiding places where large numbers of people gather.
Some areas are allowing groomers and boarding facilities such as dog daycares to open.
If you must take your pet to a groomer or boarding facility, follow any protocols put into place at the facility, such as wearing a mask and maintaining at least 6 feet of space between yourself and others if possible.
Limit pet items brought from home to the groomer or boarding facility, and disinfect any objects that are taken into a facility and returned home (such as leashes, bowls, and toys).
Use an EPA-registered disinfectantexternal icon to clean items and rinse thoroughly with clean water afterwards.
Do not wipe or bathe your pet with chemical disinfectants, alcohol, hydrogen peroxide, or other products, such as hand sanitizer, counter-cleaning wipes, or other industrial or surface cleaners.
If you have questions about appropriate products for bathing or cleaning your pet, talk to your veterinarian.
Do not put masks on pets, and do not take a sick pet to a groomer or boarding facility.
Signs of sickness in dogs may include fever, coughing, difficulty breathing or shortness of breath, lethargy, sneezing, discharge from the nose or eyes, vomiting, or diarrhea.
If you think your pet is sick, call your veterinarian.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
See more information on pets and COVID-19 and recommendations for how to help keep your pet safe.
Most pets that have gotten sick from the virus that causes COVID-19 were infected after close contact with a person with COVID-19.
Talk to your veterinarian about any health concerns you have about your pets.
If your pet gets sick after contact with a person with COVID-19, call your veterinarian and let them know the pet was around a person with COVID-19.
If you are sick with COVID-19, do not take your pet to the veterinary clinic yourself.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
Routine testing of animals for COVID-19 is not recommended at this time.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
However, it appears that the virus that causes COVID-19 can spread from people to animals after close contact with people with COVID-19.
Until we learn more about how this virus affects animals, use similar precautions for pets and other animals in your facility as you would for other people in your facility.
This will help protect both people and pets in your facility from COVID-19.
Talk to a veterinarian if a pet in your facility gets sick or if you have any concerns about the health of any pets in the facility.
If you think a pet in the facility was exposed to or is showing signs consistent with COVID-19, contact your state health official to discuss guidance on testing pets or other animals for the virus that causes COVID-19.
People who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 should avoid providing care for sick pets, if possible.
For more information, visit CDCs If You Have Pets webpage.
CDC does not have any evidence to suggest that imported animals or animal products pose a risk for spreading COVID-19 in the United States.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
CDC, the U. S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) play distinct but complementary roles in regulating the importation of live animals and animal products into the United States.
Please refer to CDCs requirements for bringing a dog to the United States.
The current requirements for rabies vaccination apply to dogs imported from high-risk countries for rabies.
Imported animals will need to meet CDC and USDAsexternal iconexternal icon requirements for entering the United States.
At this time, there is no evidence that companion animals, including pets and service animals, can spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
As with any animal introduced to a new environment, animals recently imported should be observed daily for signs of illness.
If an animal becomes ill, the animal should be examined by a veterinarian.
Call your local veterinary clinic before bringing the animal into the clinic and let them know that the animal was recently imported from another country.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
Currently, there is no evidence to suggest the virus that causes COVID-19 is circulating in free-living wildlife in the United States, or that wildlife might be a source of infection for people in the United States.
If a wild animal were to become infected with the virus, we dont know whether the infection could then spread among wildlife or if it could spread to other animals, including pets.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals, including wildlife, could be affected by COVID-19.
Because wildlife can carry other diseases, even without looking sick, it is always important to enjoy wildlife from a distance.
Take steps to prevent getting sick from wildlife in the United States:
See COVID-19 and Animals for more information.
Other coronaviruses have been found in North American bats in the past, but there is currently no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 is present in any free-living wildlife in the United States, including bats.
In general, coronaviruses do not cause illness or death in bats, but we dont yet know if this new coronavirus would make North American species of bats sick.
Bats are an important part of natural ecosystems, and their populations are already declining in the United States.
Bat populations could be further threatened by the disease itself or by harm inflicted on bats resulting from a misconception that bats are spreading COVID-19.
However, there is no evidence that bats in the United States are a source of the virus that causes COVID-19 for people.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how bats could be affected by COVID-19.
Currently, there is no evidence that you can get infected with the virus that causes COVID-19 by eating food, including wild hunted game meat.
However, hunters can get infected with other diseases when processing or eating game.
Hunters should always practice good hygiene when processing animals by following these food safety recommendations:
You should follow your state and/or local jurisdictional guidance regarding continuing operations at your facility.
There have not been any reports of horses testing positive for the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
COVID-19 is primarily spread from person to person, so steps should be taken to reduce the risks for people visiting your facility.
For more information, see Guidance on Preparing Workplaces for COVID-19pdf iconexternal icon and Interim Guidance for Businesses and Employers to Plan and Respond to Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Community mitigation is especially important before a vaccine or drug becomes widely available.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
Individual people, communities, schools, businesses, and healthcare organizations have a role to play in community mitigation.
Policies*, which include limits on large gatherings, restrictions on businesses, and school closures are often needed to fully put in place community mitigation strategies.
Each community is unique.
Because some actions can be very disruptive to daily life, mitigation activities will be different depending on how much disease has spread within the community, what the community population is like, and the ability to take these actions at the local level.
To identify appropriate activities, all parts of a community that might be affected need to be considered, including populations most vulnerable to severe illness, and those who might be more affected socially or economically.
When selecting mitigation activities, states and communities need to consider the spread of disease locally, characteristics of the people who live in the community (for example, age groups, languages spoken, overall health status), and the kind of public health resources and healthcare systems (like hospitals) that are available in the community.
State and local officials may need to adjust community mitigation activities and immediately take steps to scale them up or down depending on the changing local situation.
Putting mitigation into practice is based on
*CDC cannot address the policies of any business or organization.
CDC shares recommendations based on the best available science to help people make decisions that improve their health and safety.
In all cases, follow the guidance of your healthcare provider and local health department.
Local decisions depend on local circumstances.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
Currently there is no evidence that people can get COVID-19 by eating or handling food.
It may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object, such as a food package or dining ware that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
There is also no current evidence that people can get COVID-19 by drinking water.
The COVID-19 virus has not been detected in drinking water.
Conventional water treatment methods that use filtration and disinfection, such as those in most municipal drinking water systems, should remove or kill the virus that causes COVID-19.​ Learn more about food and COVID-19.
The virus that causes COVID-19 has not been detected in treated drinking water.
Water treatment plants use filters and disinfectants to remove or kill germs, like the virus that causes COVID-19.
The Environmental Protection Agency regulates water treatment plants to ensure that treated water is safe to drink.
Currently, there is no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 can be spread to people by drinking treated water.
COVID-19 is spread mainly through close contact from person-to-person.
You can continue to use and drink water from your tap as usual.
The virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in the feces of some patients diagnosed with COVID-19.
However, it is unclear whether the virus found in feces may be capable of causing COVID-19.
There has not been any confirmed report of the virus spreading from feces to a person.
Scientists also do not know how much risk there is that the virus could be spread from the feces of an infected person to another person.
However, they think this risk is low based on data from previous outbreaks of diseases caused by related coronaviruses, such as severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS).
Recently, ribonucleic acid (RNA) from the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater, and no information to date that anyone has become sick with COVID-19 because of exposure to wastewater.
At this time, the risk of transmission of the virus that causes COVID-19 through properly designed and maintained sewerage systems is thought to be low.
Recently, ribonucleic acid (RNA) from the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater, and no information to date that anyone has become sick with COVID-19 because of exposure to wastewater.
Standard practices associated with wastewater treatment plant operations should be sufficient to protect wastewater workers from the virus that causes COVID-19.
These standard practices can include engineering and administrative controls, hygiene precautions, specific safe work practices, and personal protective equipment (PPE) normally required when handling untreated wastewater.
No additional COVID-19–specific protections are recommended for workers involved in wastewater management, including those at wastewater treatment facilities.
See Information for Wastewater and Sanitation System Workers on COVID-19 for additional information.
In most cases, it is safe to wash your hands with soap and tap water during a Boil Water Advisory.
Follow the guidance from your local public health officials.
If soap and water are not available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in pools, hot tubs, or water playgrounds.
Plus, proper operation of public pools, hot tubs, and water playgrounds (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) and disinfection of the water (with chlorine or bromine) should inactivate the virus.
The virus mainly spreads when respiratory droplets from infected people land in the mouths or noses of others or possibly when inhaled into the lungs by others.
If a public pool, hot tub, or water playground is open, it is important for all visitors and staff to take steps to slow the spread of the virus:
See Considerations for Public Pools, Hot Tubs, and Water Playgrounds for more information.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in pools, including saltwater pools.
Plus, proper operation of public pools (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) and disinfection of the water (with chlorine or bromine) should inactivate the virus.
Saltwater pools are chlorinated pools.
In traditional pools, chlorine products (such as granules or liquid bleach) are added to the water to disinfect it.
In saltwater pools, table salt (made up of sodium and chloride) is added to the water, and an electrical current is then run through the water with dissolved salt.
This creates the same disinfecting form of chlorine that is created when chlorine products are added to the water in traditional pools.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in lakes, oceans, rivers, or other natural bodies of water.
The virus mainly spreads when respiratory droplets from infected people land in the mouths or noses of others or possibly when inhaled into the lungs by others.
If a public beach or other swim area in a natural body of water is open, it is important for all visitors and staff to take steps to slow the spread of the virus:
See Considerations for Public Beaches for more information.
RNAexternal icon of the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater, which can come from combined sewer overflowsexternal icon (rainwater runoff, domestic sewage, and industrial wastewater) and other sourcesexternal icon (such as, leaking septic tanks or animal waste from farms nearby) and enter swim areas.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater.
Plus, CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus being spread by swallowing or coming in contact with water contaminated by feces (poop) from an infected person.
At lakes, oceans, and rivers with routine water quality monitoring programs, staff look for changes in fecal (poop) contamination of the water.
Water quality advisories and beach closures alert the public to avoid getting in or on the water because of increased fecal contamination.
Learn more about healthy swimming in natural bodies of water and access water quality information by state.
No, do NOT wear a cloth mask in the water.
It can be difficult to breathe through a cloth mask when it is wet.
Plus, wet cloth masks dont slow the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19 as well as dry cloth masks.
All of this means it is particularly important to stay at least 6 feet apart in the water from people you dont live with.
In case cloth masks do get wet by mistake, bring a second (or extra) cloth mask for everyone heading out to the public pool or beach.
CDC does not yet have evidence on the effectiveness of different types of cloth materials.
Wearing cloth masks can help prevent people infected with the virus that causes COVID-19 from spreading the virus.
Make sure your cloth mask:
Cloth masks should NOT be worn by children less than 2 years old or anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Learn more about how to wear, take off, and wash your cloth masks.
The design of the public pool, hot tub, or water playground and surrounding deck and if visitors live together or not will affect how many people can stay at least 6 feet apart from those they dont live with.
CDC recommends operators of public pools, hot tubs, and water playgrounds:
Operators might want to limit the number of people in and around the water so if the water needs to be evacuated (because of lightning or other health or safety threat) social distancing can be maintained on the deck.
Otherwise, if the water is evacuated and social distancing cannot be maintained on the deck, close the deck to visitors.
There is no standard formula to determine how many people can maintain social distancing in the water and on the surrounding deck.
See Considerations for Public Pools, Hot Tubs, and Water Playgrounds for more information.
No.
Only List N disinfectants approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agencyexternal icon should be used to disinfect surfaces (such as handrails and in bathrooms) and shared objects (such as kickboards and pool noodles).
The list includes hundreds of disinfectants.
Operators of public pools, hot tubs, or water playgrounds (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) should consult with the design company or engineer to determine which disinfectants are best suited for surfaces and with manufacturers to determine which disinfectants are best suited for shared objects.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectants.
We dont know yet.
Early scientific data suggest that SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, can be inactivated by the suns UV light.
However, the ability of the suns UV light to inactivate the virus on surfaces (such as handrails and in bathrooms) and shared objects (such as kickboards and pool noodles) needs more research.
Factors — such as cloudiness, latitude (distance from equator), time of day, and amount of time exposed to the suns UV light — will determine how effectively the virus is inactivated.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectantsexternal icon.
The more frequently a surface is touched by multiple people, the more frequently it should be cleaned and then disinfected with a List N disinfectant approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agencyexternal icon.
Frequently touched surfaces should be cleaned and disinfected at least daily.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectants.
No.
RNAexternal icon of the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in feces (poop).
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in feces.
Plus, CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus being spread by swallowing or coming in contact with water contaminated by feces from an infected person.
As a result, CDC has not changed its fecal incident response recommendations.
Remember, do NOT vacuum feces out of the water.
Not when lifeguards are actively lifeguarding.
Lifeguards actively lifeguarding should not be doing other tasks that could distract them.
Drowning deaths have resulted, at least in part, from lifeguards being distracted.
Drowning can occur quickly and quietly.
Learn and take steps to prevent drowning.
Lifeguard trainers can consider the following steps to slow the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19:
CDC has more COVID-19–related considerations for public pools and public beaches and non-COVID-19–related healthy and safe swimming resources.
Help control the spread of rumors and be aware of fraud schemes.
1Fever may be subjective or confirmed
2Close contact is defined as—
a) being within approximately 6 feet (2 meters) of a COVID-19 case for a prolonged period of time; close contact can occur while caring for, living with, visiting, or sharing a health care waiting area or room with a COVID-19 case
b) having direct contact with infectious secretions of a COVID-19 case (e.g being coughed on)
If such contact occurs while not wearing recommended personal protective equipment or PPE (e.g gowns, gloves, NIOSH-certified disposable N95 respirator, eye protection), criteria for PUI consideration are met
See CDCs updated Interim Healthcare Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Persons Under Investigation for 2019 Novel Coronavirus.
Data to inform the definition of close contact are limited.
Considerations when assessing close contact include the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk) and the clinical symptoms of the person with COVID-19 (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk as does exposure to a severely ill patient).
Special consideration should be given to those exposed in health care settings.
A novel coronavirus is a new coronavirus that has not been previously identified.
The virus causing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), is not the same as the coronaviruses that commonly circulate among humans and cause mild illness, like the common cold.
On February 11, 2020 the World Health Organization announced an official name for the disease that is causing the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak, first identified in Wuhan China.
The new name of this disease is coronavirus disease 2019, abbreviated as COVID-19.
In COVID-19, ‘CO stands for ‘corona, ‘VI for ‘virus, and ‘D for disease.
Formerly, this disease was referred to as 2019 novel coronavirus or 2019-nCoV.
There are many types of human coronaviruses including some that commonly cause mild upper-respiratory tract illnesses.
COVID-19 is a new disease, caused by a novel (or new) coronavirus that has not previously been seen in humans.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person to person, mainly through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
Spread is more likely when people are in close contact with one another (within about 6 feet).
COVID-19 seems to be spreading easily and sustainably in the community (community spread) in many affected geographic areas.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
It is not yet known whether weather and temperature affect the spread of COVID-19.
Some other viruses, like those that cause the common cold and flu, spread more during cold weather months but that does not mean it is impossible to become sick with these viruses during other months.
There is much more to learn about the transmissibility, severity, and other features associated with COVID-19 and investigations are ongoing.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Each health department determines community spread differently based on local conditions.
For information on community spread in your area, please visit your health departments website.​
At this time, CDC has no data to suggest that this new coronavirus or other similar coronaviruses are spread by mosquitoes or ticks.
The main way that COVID-19 spreads is from person to person.
See How Coronavirus Spreads for more information.
Visit the How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others page to learn about how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19.
Wear masks in public settings when around people not living in your household and particularly where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, such as grocery stores, pharmacies, and gas stations.
Masks may slow the spread of the virus and help people who may have the virus and do not know it from transmitting it to others.
COVID-19 can be spread by people who do not have symptoms and do not know that they are infected.
Thats why its important for everyone to practice social distancing (staying at least 6 feet away from other people) and wear masks in public settings.
Masks provide an extra layer to help prevent the respiratory droplets from traveling in the air and onto other people.
The masks recommended are not surgical masks or N-95 respirators.
Those are critical supplies that must continue to be reserved for healthcare workers and other medical first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
More information about masks can be found on our masks site.
For more information, see Groups at Higher Risk for Severe Illness.
There is still a lot that is unknown about COVID-19 and how it spreads.
Coronaviruses are thought to be spread most often by respiratory droplets.
Although the virus can survive for a short period on some surfaces, it is unlikely to be spread from domestic or international mail, products or packaging.
However, it may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Learn more about safe handling of deliveries and mail.
In healthcare settings across the United States, donated blood is a lifesaving, essential part of caring for patients.
The need for donated blood is constant, and blood centers are open and in urgent need of donations.
CDC encourages people who are well to continue to donate blood if they are able, even if they are practicing social distancing because of COVID-19.
CDC is supporting blood centers by providing recommendations that will keep donors and staff safe.
Examples of these recommendations include spacing donor chairs 6 feet apart, thoroughly adhering to environmental cleaning practices, and encouraging donors to make donation appointments ahead of time.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Handwashing is one of the best ways to protect yourself and your family from getting sick.
Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing; going to the bathroom; and before eating or preparing food.
If soap and water are not readily available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces such as tables, doorknobs, light switches, countertops, handles, desks, phones, keyboards, toilets, faucets, and sinks.
If surfaces are dirty, clean them using detergent or soap and water prior to disinfection.
To disinfect, most common EPA-registered household disinfectants will work.
See CDCs recommendations for household cleaning and disinfection.
Most people who get COVID-19 will be able to recover at home.
CDC has directions for people who are recovering at home and their caregivers, including:
However, some people may need emergency medical attention.
Watch for symptoms and learn when to seek emergency medical attention.
When to Seek Emergency Medical Attention
Look for emergency warning signs* for COVID-19.
If someone is showing any of these signs, seek emergency medical care immediately
*This list is not all possible symptoms.
Please call your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 or call ahead to your local emergency facility: Notify the operator that you are seeking care for someone who has or may have COVID-19.
Based on available evidence, children do not appear to be at higher risk for COVID-19 than adults.
While some children and infants have been sick with COVID-19, adults make up most of the known cases to date.
However, a few children have developed multisystem inflammatory syndrome (MIS-C).
Currently, information about this syndrome is limited.
CDC is working with state and local health departments to learn more about MIS-C.
You can encourage your child to help stop the spread of COVID-19 by teaching them to do the same things everyone should do to stay healthy.
You can find additional information on preventing COVID-19 at How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others.
More information on Keeping Children Healthy during the COVID-19 Outbreak is available online.
No.
The symptoms of COVID-19 are similar in children and adults.
COVID-19 can look different in different people.
For many people, being sick with COVID-19 would be a little bit like having the flu.
People can get a fever, cough, or have a hard time taking deep breaths.
Most people who have gotten COVID-19 have not gotten very sick.
Only a small group of people who get it have had more serious problems.
CDC and partners are investigating cases of multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) associated with COVID-19.
Learn more about COVID-19 and multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C).
CDC recommends that everyone 2 years and older wear a mask that covers their nose and mouth in public settings when around people not living in your household, particularly where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain.
Masks should NOT be put on babies or children younger than 2 because of the danger of suffocation.
Children younger than 2 years of age are listed as an exception as well as anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Outbreaks can be stressful for adults and children.
When you talk with your child, try to stay calm, and reassure them that they are safe.
Talk to your children about COVID-19 and help them cope with stress.
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) is a condition where different body parts can become inflamed, including the heart, lungs, kidneys, brain, skin, eyes, or gastrointestinal organs.
We do not yet know what causes MIS-C.
However, we know that many children with MIS-C had the virus that causes COVID-19, or had been around someone with COVID-19.
MIS-C can be serious, even deadly, but most children who were diagnosed with this condition have gotten better with medical care.
Contact your childs doctor, nurse, or clinic right away if your child is showing symptoms of MIS-C. Seek emergency care right away if your child is showing any of these emergency warning signs of MIS-C or other concerning signs.
The key to slowing the spread of COVID-19 is to practice social distancing.
While school is out, children should not have in-person playdates with children from other households.
If children are playing outside their own homes, it is essential that they remain 6 feet from anyone who is not in their own household.
Some children with certain underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Make sure children practice everyday preventive behaviors, such as washing their hands often with soap and water.
Remember, if children meet outside of school in groups, it can put everyone at risk.
For more information, see Help Stop the Spread of COVID-19 in Children.
For more information, see Help Children Learn at Home.
Check with your school on plans to continue meal services during the school dismissal.
Many schools are keeping school facilities open to allow families to pick up meals or are providing grab-and-go meals at a central location.
For more information, see Keep Children Healthy during the COVID-19 Outbreak.
Older adults and people who have serious underlying medical conditions are at highest risk of getting sick from COVID-19.
Its not known yet whether all children with underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Although most COVID-19 cases in children are not severe, serious illness that needs to be treated at the hospital still happens.
Some data on children reported that the majority who needed hospitalization for COVID-19 had at least one underlying medical condition.
The most common underlying conditions reported among children with COVID-19 include chronic lung disease (including asthma), heart disease, and conditions that weaken the immune system.
This information suggests that children with these underlying medical conditions may be at risk for more severe illness from COVID-19.
More data are needed to learn which underlying or complex medical conditions may put children at increased risk.
CDC is monitoring new information as it becomes available and will provide updates as needed.
Learn more about caring for children with special health care needs during a disaster and people who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
In addition to following the recommendations to prevent getting sick and running essential errands, families should take extra steps recommended for persons with higher risk of severe COVID-19 illness and steps outlined for those with potential COVID-19 exposure or confirmed illness.
Helping children understand and follow recommendations, like social distancing and wearing masks, can be challenging if your child has intellectual disabilities, sensory issues, or other special healthcare needs.
Supporting children with special healthcare needs can put additional demands and stress on families, especially during emergency situations.
You have likely found ways to manage the stress and challenges unique to your familys situation.
It is important to continue your familys coping methods, including reaching out to other family members, friends, support groups, and organizations that have been helpful in the past.
See information on helping children cope and coping with stress (such as visiting parks, trails, or open spaces) and making your family stronger.
If you, or someone you care about, are feeling overwhelmed with emotions like sadness, depression, or anxiety, or feel like you want to harm yourself or others:
If your child with special healthcare needs becomes sick with symptoms of COVID-19, contact your childs healthcare provider.
If your child has new or worsening emergency warning signs, such as trouble breathing, pain or pressure in the chest, confusion or inability to wake them up, or bluish lips or face, call 911.
If you think your child may have COVID-19, notify the operator so that first responders may be appropriately prepared to protect themselves and others.
Notify your childs healthcare provider if someone else in your house becomes sick with COVID-19, so they can provide any advice specific for your child.
See additional information if someone in the home is sick with COVID-19 or suspected of having COVID-19.
If your childs healthcare provider tells you to go to the hospital for any health problem, including COVID-19
Create a household plan of action to help protect your health and the health of those you care about in the event of an outbreak of COVID-19 in your community:
Plan for potential changes at your workplace.
Talk to your employer about their emergency operations plan, including sick-leave policies and telework options.
Learn how businesses and employers can plan for and respond to COVID-19.
CDC does not encourage the production and use of homemade hand sanitizer products because of concerns over the correct use of the ingredientsexternal icon and the need to work under sterile conditions to make the product.
Local industries that are looking into producing hand sanitizer to fill in for commercial shortages can refer to the World Health Organization guidance.pdf iconexternal icon Organizations should revert to the use of commercially produced, FDA-approved product once such supplies again become available.
People with COVID-19 have reported a wide range of symptoms – from mild symptoms to severe illness.
Symptoms may appear 2-14 days after exposure to the virus.
If you have fever, cough, or other symptoms, you might have COVID-19.
Look for emergency warning signs* for COVID-19.
If someone is showing any of these signs, seek emergency medical care immediately
*This list is not all possible symptoms.
Please call your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 or call ahead to your local emergency facility: Notify the operator that you are seeking care for someone who has or may have COVID-19.
Yes.
It is possible to test positive for flu (as well as other respiratory infections) and COVID-19 at the same time.
Maybe; not everyone needs to be tested for COVID-19.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and want to get tested, call your healthcare provider first.
Most people will have mild illness and can recover at home without medical care and may not need to be tested.
CDC has guidance for who should be tested, but decisions about testing are made by state and local health departments and healthcare providers.
You can also visit your state or local health departments website to look for the latest local information on testing.
Decisions about testing are made by state and localexternal icon health departments or healthcare providers.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and are not tested, it is important to stay home.
What to do if you are sick.
COVID-19 testing differs by location.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and want to get tested, call your healthcare provider first.
You can also visit your state or localexternal icon health departments website to look for the latest local information on testing.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized viral tests that let you collect either a nasal swabexternal icon or a saliva sampleexternal icon at home.
However, you will still need to send your sample to a laboratory for analysis.
If you test positive for COVID-19, know what protective steps to take if you are sick or caring for someone.
If you test negative for COVID-19, you probably were not infected at the time your sample was collected.
However, that does not mean you will not get sick.
The test result only means that you did not have COVID-19 at the time of testing.
You might test negative if the sample was collected early in your infection and test positive later during your illness.
You could also be exposed to COVID-19 after the test and get infected then.
This means you could still spread the virus.
If you develop symptoms later, you might need another test to determine if you are infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.
For more information about viral tests, please visit Test for Current Infection.
Antibody tests for COVID-19 are available through healthcare providers and laboratories.
Check with your healthcare provider to see if they offer antibody tests and whether you should get one.
A positive test result shows you might have antibodies from an infection with the virus that causes COVID-19.
However, there is a chance a positive result means that you have antibodies from an infection with a virus from the same family of viruses (called coronaviruses), such as the one that causes the common cold.
Having antibodies to the virus that causes COVID-19 might provide protection from getting infected with the virus again.
If it does, we do not know how much protection the antibodies might provide or how long this protection might last.
You should continue to protect yourself and others since you could get infected with the virus again.
If you test negative, you might not have ever had COVID-19.
Talk with your healthcare provider about your test result and the type of test you took to understand what your result means.
Regardless of whether you test positive or negative, the results do not confirm whether or not you are able to spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
Until we know more, continue to take steps to protect yourself and others.
If you want more information about antibody tests, see Test for Past Infection.
Yes, it is possible.
You may test negative if the sample was collected early in your infection and test positive later during this illness.
You could also be exposed to COVID-19 after the test and get infected then.
Even if you test negative, you still should take steps to protect yourself and others.
See Testing for Current Infection for more information.
COVID-19 is a new disease and there is limited information regarding risk factors for severe disease.
Based on currently available information and clinical expertise, older adults and people with underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
If you are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19, you should:
Most people with disabilities are not inherently at higher risk for becoming infected with or having severe illness from COVID-19.
Some people with physical limitations or other disabilities might be at a higher risk of infection because of their underlying medical condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Contact tracing has been used for decades by state and local health departments to slow or stop the spread of infectious diseases.
Contact tracing slows the spread of COVID-19 by
During contact tracing, the health department staff will not ask you for
Discussions with health department staff are confidential.
This means that your personal and medical information will be kept private and only shared with those who may need to know, like your health care provider.
If you have been diagnosed with COVID-19, your name will not be shared with those you came in contact with.
The health department will only notify people you were in close contact with (within 6 feet for more than 15 minutes) that they might have been exposed to COVID-19.
Each state and jurisdiction use their own method for collecting and protecting health information.
To learn more, contact your state or local health department.
You may also be interested in: If I participate contact tracing for COVID-19 using a digital tool, is my personal health information secure?
For COVID-19, a close contact is anyone who was within 6 feet of an infected person for at least 15 minutes.
An infected person can spread COVID-19 starting 48 hours (or 2 days) before the person had any symptoms or tested positive for COVID-19.
Yes, you are still considered a close contact even if you were wearing a mask while you were around someone with COVID-19.
Masks are meant to protect other people in case you are infected, and not to protect you from becoming infected.
If you have been around someone who is sick with COVID-19, local authorities, the health department, or your doctor may recommend that you get tested for COVID-19.
The health department may be able to provide resources for testing in your area.
If you are diagnosed with COVID-19, someone from the health department may call you to check on your health, discuss who you have been around, and ask where you spent time while you may have been able to spread COVID-19 to others.
You will also be asked to continue to stay at home and self-isolate, away from others.
Watch for or monitor your symptoms of COVID-19.
If your symptoms worsen or become severe, you should seek medical care.
If you were around someone who has been diagnosed with COVID-19, someone from the health department may call you to let you know that you may have been exposed to COVID-19.
Stay home away from others for 14 days (self-quarantine) after your last contact with that person.
Health department staff will help identify the dates for your self-quarantine.
Health department staff can also provide resources for COVID-19 testing in your area.
Monitor your health and watch for symptoms of COVID-19.
Remember, symptoms may appear 2-14 days after you were exposed to COVID-19.
Tell the health department if you develop any symptoms.
Tell people you were around recently if you become ill, so they can monitor their health.
If your symptoms worsen or become severe, seek medical care.
Severe symptoms include trouble breathing, persistent pain or pressure in the chest, new confusion, inability to wake or stay awake, or bluish lips or face.
The health department staff will not ask you for
Yes.
You should still self-quarantine for 14 days since your last exposure.
It can take up to 14 days after exposure to the virus for a person to develop COVID-19 symptoms.
A negative result before end of the 14-day quarantine period does not rule out possible infection.
By self-quarantining for 14 days, you lower the chance of possibly exposing others to COVID-19.
People with COVID-19 can still spread the virus even if they dont have any symptoms.
If you were around someone who had COVID-19, it is critical that you stay home and away from others for 14 days from the last day that you were around that person.
Staying home and away from others at all times helps your health department in the fight against COVID-19 and helps protect you, your family, and your community.
If you have been around someone who was identified as a close contact to a person with COVID-19, closely monitor yourself for any symptoms of COVID-19.
You do not need to self-quarantine unless you develop symptoms or if the person identified as a close contact develops COVID-19.
No, there will not be a national app for contact tracing.
There are many options available now, and it is up to each state and individual to decide which tools best fit their needs.
Yes, if you agree to participate in contact tracing for COVID-19 with the health department, your information is secure.
Discussions with health department staff are confidential.
This means that your personal and medical information will be kept private and only shared with those who may need to know, like your health care provider.
Your name will not be shared with those you came in contact with.
If you have been diagnosed with COVID-19, the health department will only notify people you were in close contact with (within 6 feet for more than 15 minutes) that they might have been exposed to COVID-19.
Health departments may use case management tools to help make the contact tracing process more efficient.
If you choose to provide information through one of these tools, your information is secure and stored with the health department.
These tools also help health departments quickly receive and analyze information about COVID-19.
Case management tools are under the same laws and regulations for all sensitive health information use (e.g.
HIPPA).
You must provide consent for the health department to collect information using a case management tool.
Just like traditional contact tracing, digital tools will not collect information regarding money, Social Security numbers, bank account information, salary information, or credit card numbers.
Exposure notification tools may be an app that you can download on your personal cell phone.
If you choose to download an exposure notification app for COVID-19, your information is secure.
Exposure notification apps are developed in collaboration with or endorsed by health departments.
These apps undergo rigorous testing to determine their trustworthiness, security, and ability to protect peoples privacy.
Until you give consent to share information with your local health department, any information you have entered into the app is stored only on your personal phone.
Your information is stored only on your own phone and is not sent to the health department or any other third party.
The app and your information can be deleted any time.
When you consent to share your information with the local health department, your information is secure.
No, you are not required to download an app to give information for contact tracing for COVID-19.
Health departments commonly use case management tools to make the contact tracing process more efficient.
These types of tools are not downloaded on personal cell phones.
If you choose to give information to your local or state health department for contact tracing for COVID-19, you do not need to download an app on your cell phone.
The health department staff may call you to
It is up to you to decide if you download an exposure notification app for COVID-19.
There is currently no known risk associated with being in the same room at a funeral or visitation service with the body of someone who died of COVID-19.
See How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others to learn how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19, if you decide to attend a funeral or visitation.
COVID-19 is a new disease and we are still learning how it spreads.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
This type of spread is not a concern after death.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
This is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
People should consider not touching the body of someone who has died of COVID-19.
Older people and people of all ages with severe underlying health conditions are at higher risk of severe illness from COVID-19.
There may be less of a chance of the virus spreading from certain types of touching, such as holding the hand or hugging after the body has been prepared for viewing.
Other activities, such as kissing, washing, and shrouding should be avoided before, during, and after the body has been prepared, if possible.
If washing the body or shrouding are important religious or cultural practices, families are encouraged to work with their communitys cultural and religious leaders and funeral home staff on how to reduce their exposure as much as possible.
At a minimum, people conducting these activities should wear disposable gloves.
If splashing of fluids is expected, additional personal protective equipment (PPE) may be required (such as disposable gown, face shield, or goggles and N-95 respirator).
If desired, you may retrieve the belongings of a loved one who has died of COVID-19 outside their home (for example, in a hospital setting).
Depending on local rules and regulations, family members may retrieve these belongings at the funeral home or the healthcare facility.
You should use gloves and practice good hand hygiene when handling your loved ones belongings.
Depending on the type of belongings, such as electronics, you should also follow the household item-specific cleaning and disinfection guidelines when handling these items.
When a US citizen dies outside the United States, the deceased persons next of kin or legal representative should notify US consular officials at the Department of State.
Consular personnel are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, to provide assistance to US citizens for overseas emergencies.
If a family member, domestic partner, or legal representative is in a different country from the deceased person, he or she should call the Department of States Office of Overseas Citizens Services in Washington, DC, from 8 am to 5 pm Eastern time, Monday through Friday, at 888-407-4747 (toll-free) or 202-501-4444.
For emergency assistance after working hours or on weekends and holidays, call the Department of State switchboard at 202-647-4000 and ask to speak with the Overseas Citizens Services duty officer.
In addition, the US embassyexternal iconexternal iconexternal icon closest to or in the country where the US citizen died can provide assistance.
CDC does not require an autopsy before the remains of a person who died overseas are returned to the United States.
Depending on the circumstances surrounding the death, some countries may require an autopsy.
Sources of support to the family include the local consulate or embassy, travel insurance provider, tour operator, faith-based and aid organizations, and the deceaseds employer.
There likely will need to be an official identification of the body and official documents issued by the consular office.
CDC requirements for importing human remains depend upon if the body has been embalmed, cremated, or if the person died from a quarantinable communicable disease.
At this time, COVID-19 is a quarantinable communicable disease in the United States and the remains must meet the standards for importation found in 42 Code of Federal Regulations Part 71.55 and may be cleared, released, and authorized for entry into the United States only under the following conditions:
Please see CDCs guidance for additional information.
Cleaning with soap and water removes germs, dirt, and impurities from surfaces.
It lowers the risk of spreading infection.
Disinfecting kills germs on surfaces.
By killing germs on a surface after cleaning, it can further lower the risk of spreading infection.
The risk of transmitting or spreading SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, during vacuuming is unknown.
In order to reduce the need for cleaning, disinfection, and vacuuming, consider removing area rugs completely, if possible.
At this time, there are no reported cases of COVID-19 associated with vacuuming.
If vacuuming is necessary or required in a school, business, or community facility that was used by a person with suspected or confirmed COVID-19, first follow the CDC recommendations for Cleaning and Disinfection for Community Facilities that apply, which includes a wait time of 24 hours, or as long as practical.
After cleaning and disinfection, the following recommendations may help reduce the risk to workers and other individuals when vacuuming:
Routine cleaning is the everyday cleaning practices that businesses and communities normally use to maintain a healthy environment.
Surfaces frequently touched by multiple people, such as door handles, bathroom surfaces, and handrails, should be cleaned with soap and water or another detergent at least daily when facilities are in use.
More frequent cleaning and disinfection may be required based on level of use.
For example, certain surfaces and objects in public spaces, such as shopping carts and point of sale keypads, should be cleaned and disinfected before each use.
Cleaning removes dirt and impurities, including germs, from surfaces.
Cleaning alone does not kill germs, but it reduces the number of germs on a surface.
Cleaning does not kill germs, but by removing them, it lowers their numbers and the risk of spreading infection.
If a surface may have gotten the virus on it from a person with or suspected to have COVID-19, the surface should be cleaned and disinfected.
Disinfecting kills germs on surfaces.
Regular cleaning staff can clean and disinfect community spaces.
Cleaning staff should be trained on appropriate use of cleaning and disinfection chemicals and provided with the personal protective equipment (PPE) required for the chemicals used.
Companies do not necessarily need to close after a person with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 has been in a company facility.
The area(s) used or visited by the ill person should be closed for 24 hours or as long as possible.
Open outside doors and windows as much as possible ensuring that doing so does not pose a safety risk to children using the facility (i.e.
make sure that children are not able to enter the closed off area through any windows or doors).
and use ventilating fans to increase air circulation in the area.
Once the area has been appropriately disinfected, it can be opened for use.
Workers without close contact with the person with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 can return to work immediately after disinfection is completed.
The efficacy of these disinfection methods against the virus that causes COVID-19 is not known.
EPA only recommends use of the surface disinfectants identified on List Nexternal icon against the virus that causes COVID-19.
EPA does not routinely review the safety or efficacy of pesticidal devices, such as UV lights, LED lights, or ultrasonic devices.
Therefore, EPA cannot confirm whether, or under what circumstances, such products might be effective against the spread of COVID-19.
Outdoor areas generally require normal routine cleaning and do not require disinfection.
Spraying disinfectant on outdoor playgrounds is not an efficient use of disinfectant supplies and has not been proven to reduce the risk of COVID-19 to the public.
You should maintain existing cleaning and hygiene practices for outdoor areas.
If practical, high touch surfaces made of plastic or metal, such as grab bars and railings, should be cleaned routinely.
Cleaning and disinfection of wooden surfaces (e.g play structures, benches, tables) or groundcovers (e.g mulch, sand) is not recommended.
CDC does not recommend the use of sanitizing tunnels.
There is no evidence that they are effective in reducing the spread of COVID-19.
Chemicals used in sanitizing tunnels could cause skin, eye, or respiratory irritation or damage.
CDC does not recommend disinfection of sidewalks or roads.
Spraying disinfectant on sidewalks and roads is not an efficient use of disinfectant supplies and has not been proven to reduce the risk of COVID-19 to the public.
The risk of spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 from these surfaces is very low and disinfection is not effective on these surfaces.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
See If You Have Pets for more information about pets and COVID-19.
However, since animals can spread other diseases to people, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, such as washing your hands and maintaining good hygiene.
For more information on the many benefits of pet ownership, as well as staying safe and healthy around animals including pets, livestock, and wildlife, visit CDCs Healthy Pets, Healthy People website.
Although we know certain bacteria and fungi can be carried on fur and hair, there is no evidence that viruses, including the virus that causes COVID-19, can spread to people from the skin, fur, or hair of pets.
However, because animals can sometimes carry other germs that can make people sick, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, including washing hands before and after interacting with them.
Dog parks provide socialization and exercise for dogs, which is an important part of their wellbeing.
Because there is a risk that people with COVID-19 could spread it to animals, CDC recommends that you do not let pets interact with people outside of your household, especially in places with community spread of COVID-19.
Therefore, you should consider avoiding dog parks or other places where large numbers of people and dogs gather.
Some areas are allowing dog parks to open.
If you choose to go to a dog park, follow local guidelines.
There are ways to reduce the risk of you or your dog getting infected with COVID-19 if you go to a dog park.
See more information on pets and COVID-19 and recommendations for how to help keep your pet safe.
Until we know more about how this virus affects animals, CDC encourages pet owners to treat pets as you would other human family members to protect them from possible infection.
This means limiting contact between your pets and people outside your household as much as possible and avoiding places where large numbers of people gather.
Some areas are allowing groomers and boarding facilities such as dog daycares to open.
If you must take your pet to a groomer or boarding facility, follow any protocols put into place at the facility, such as wearing a mask and maintaining at least 6 feet of space between yourself and others if possible.
Limit pet items brought from home to the groomer or boarding facility, and disinfect any objects that are taken into a facility and returned home (such as leashes, bowls, and toys).
Use an EPA-registered disinfectantexternal icon to clean items and rinse thoroughly with clean water afterwards.
Do not wipe or bathe your pet with chemical disinfectants, alcohol, hydrogen peroxide, or other products, such as hand sanitizer, counter-cleaning wipes, or other industrial or surface cleaners.
If you have questions about appropriate products for bathing or cleaning your pet, talk to your veterinarian.
Do not put masks on pets, and do not take a sick pet to a groomer or boarding facility.
Signs of sickness in dogs may include fever, coughing, difficulty breathing or shortness of breath, lethargy, sneezing, discharge from the nose or eyes, vomiting, or diarrhea.
If you think your pet is sick, call your veterinarian.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
See more information on pets and COVID-19 and recommendations for how to help keep your pet safe.
Most pets that have gotten sick from the virus that causes COVID-19 were infected after close contact with a person with COVID-19.
Talk to your veterinarian about any health concerns you have about your pets.
If your pet gets sick after contact with a person with COVID-19, call your veterinarian and let them know the pet was around a person with COVID-19.
If you are sick with COVID-19, do not take your pet to the veterinary clinic yourself.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
Routine testing of animals for COVID-19 is not recommended at this time.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
However, it appears that the virus that causes COVID-19 can spread from people to animals after close contact with people with COVID-19.
Until we learn more about how this virus affects animals, use similar precautions for pets and other animals in your facility as you would for other people in your facility.
This will help protect both people and pets in your facility from COVID-19.
Talk to a veterinarian if a pet in your facility gets sick or if you have any concerns about the health of any pets in the facility.
If you think a pet in the facility was exposed to or is showing signs consistent with COVID-19, contact your state health official to discuss guidance on testing pets or other animals for the virus that causes COVID-19.
People who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 should avoid providing care for sick pets, if possible.
For more information, visit CDCs If You Have Pets webpage.
CDC does not have any evidence to suggest that imported animals or animal products pose a risk for spreading COVID-19 in the United States.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
CDC, the U. S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) play distinct but complementary roles in regulating the importation of live animals and animal products into the United States.
Please refer to CDCs requirements for bringing a dog to the United States.
The current requirements for rabies vaccination apply to dogs imported from high-risk countries for rabies.
Imported animals will need to meet CDC and USDAsexternal iconexternal icon requirements for entering the United States.
At this time, there is no evidence that companion animals, including pets and service animals, can spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
As with any animal introduced to a new environment, animals recently imported should be observed daily for signs of illness.
If an animal becomes ill, the animal should be examined by a veterinarian.
Call your local veterinary clinic before bringing the animal into the clinic and let them know that the animal was recently imported from another country.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
Currently, there is no evidence to suggest the virus that causes COVID-19 is circulating in free-living wildlife in the United States, or that wildlife might be a source of infection for people in the United States.
If a wild animal were to become infected with the virus, we dont know whether the infection could then spread among wildlife or if it could spread to other animals, including pets.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals, including wildlife, could be affected by COVID-19.
Because wildlife can carry other diseases, even without looking sick, it is always important to enjoy wildlife from a distance.
Take steps to prevent getting sick from wildlife in the United States:
See COVID-19 and Animals for more information.
Other coronaviruses have been found in North American bats in the past, but there is currently no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 is present in any free-living wildlife in the United States, including bats.
In general, coronaviruses do not cause illness or death in bats, but we dont yet know if this new coronavirus would make North American species of bats sick.
Bats are an important part of natural ecosystems, and their populations are already declining in the United States.
Bat populations could be further threatened by the disease itself or by harm inflicted on bats resulting from a misconception that bats are spreading COVID-19.
However, there is no evidence that bats in the United States are a source of the virus that causes COVID-19 for people.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how bats could be affected by COVID-19.
Currently, there is no evidence that you can get infected with the virus that causes COVID-19 by eating food, including wild hunted game meat.
However, hunters can get infected with other diseases when processing or eating game.
Hunters should always practice good hygiene when processing animals by following these food safety recommendations:
You should follow your state and/or local jurisdictional guidance regarding continuing operations at your facility.
There have not been any reports of horses testing positive for the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
COVID-19 is primarily spread from person to person, so steps should be taken to reduce the risks for people visiting your facility.
For more information, see Guidance on Preparing Workplaces for COVID-19pdf iconexternal icon and Interim Guidance for Businesses and Employers to Plan and Respond to Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Community mitigation is especially important before a vaccine or drug becomes widely available.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
Individual people, communities, schools, businesses, and healthcare organizations have a role to play in community mitigation.
Policies*, which include limits on large gatherings, restrictions on businesses, and school closures are often needed to fully put in place community mitigation strategies.
Each community is unique.
Because some actions can be very disruptive to daily life, mitigation activities will be different depending on how much disease has spread within the community, what the community population is like, and the ability to take these actions at the local level.
To identify appropriate activities, all parts of a community that might be affected need to be considered, including populations most vulnerable to severe illness, and those who might be more affected socially or economically.
When selecting mitigation activities, states and communities need to consider the spread of disease locally, characteristics of the people who live in the community (for example, age groups, languages spoken, overall health status), and the kind of public health resources and healthcare systems (like hospitals) that are available in the community.
State and local officials may need to adjust community mitigation activities and immediately take steps to scale them up or down depending on the changing local situation.
Putting mitigation into practice is based on
*CDC cannot address the policies of any business or organization.
CDC shares recommendations based on the best available science to help people make decisions that improve their health and safety.
In all cases, follow the guidance of your healthcare provider and local health department.
Local decisions depend on local circumstances.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
Currently there is no evidence that people can get COVID-19 by eating or handling food.
It may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object, such as a food package or dining ware that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
There is also no current evidence that people can get COVID-19 by drinking water.
The COVID-19 virus has not been detected in drinking water.
Conventional water treatment methods that use filtration and disinfection, such as those in most municipal drinking water systems, should remove or kill the virus that causes COVID-19.​ Learn more about food and COVID-19.
The virus that causes COVID-19 has not been detected in treated drinking water.
Water treatment plants use filters and disinfectants to remove or kill germs, like the virus that causes COVID-19.
The Environmental Protection Agency regulates water treatment plants to ensure that treated water is safe to drink.
Currently, there is no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 can be spread to people by drinking treated water.
COVID-19 is spread mainly through close contact from person-to-person.
You can continue to use and drink water from your tap as usual.
The virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in the feces of some patients diagnosed with COVID-19.
However, it is unclear whether the virus found in feces may be capable of causing COVID-19.
There has not been any confirmed report of the virus spreading from feces to a person.
Scientists also do not know how much risk there is that the virus could be spread from the feces of an infected person to another person.
However, they think this risk is low based on data from previous outbreaks of diseases caused by related coronaviruses, such as severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS).
Recently, ribonucleic acid (RNA) from the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater, and no information to date that anyone has become sick with COVID-19 because of exposure to wastewater.
At this time, the risk of transmission of the virus that causes COVID-19 through properly designed and maintained sewerage systems is thought to be low.
Recently, ribonucleic acid (RNA) from the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater, and no information to date that anyone has become sick with COVID-19 because of exposure to wastewater.
Standard practices associated with wastewater treatment plant operations should be sufficient to protect wastewater workers from the virus that causes COVID-19.
These standard practices can include engineering and administrative controls, hygiene precautions, specific safe work practices, and personal protective equipment (PPE) normally required when handling untreated wastewater.
No additional COVID-19–specific protections are recommended for workers involved in wastewater management, including those at wastewater treatment facilities.
See Information for Wastewater and Sanitation System Workers on COVID-19 for additional information.
In most cases, it is safe to wash your hands with soap and tap water during a Boil Water Advisory.
Follow the guidance from your local public health officials.
If soap and water are not available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in pools, hot tubs, or water playgrounds.
Plus, proper operation of public pools, hot tubs, and water playgrounds (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) and disinfection of the water (with chlorine or bromine) should inactivate the virus.
The virus mainly spreads when respiratory droplets from infected people land in the mouths or noses of others or possibly when inhaled into the lungs by others.
If a public pool, hot tub, or water playground is open, it is important for all visitors and staff to take steps to slow the spread of the virus:
See Considerations for Public Pools, Hot Tubs, and Water Playgrounds for more information.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in pools, including saltwater pools.
Plus, proper operation of public pools (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) and disinfection of the water (with chlorine or bromine) should inactivate the virus.
Saltwater pools are chlorinated pools.
In traditional pools, chlorine products (such as granules or liquid bleach) are added to the water to disinfect it.
In saltwater pools, table salt (made up of sodium and chloride) is added to the water, and an electrical current is then run through the water with dissolved salt.
This creates the same disinfecting form of chlorine that is created when chlorine products are added to the water in traditional pools.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in lakes, oceans, rivers, or other natural bodies of water.
The virus mainly spreads when respiratory droplets from infected people land in the mouths or noses of others or possibly when inhaled into the lungs by others.
If a public beach or other swim area in a natural body of water is open, it is important for all visitors and staff to take steps to slow the spread of the virus:
See Considerations for Public Beaches for more information.
RNAexternal icon of the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater, which can come from combined sewer overflowsexternal icon (rainwater runoff, domestic sewage, and industrial wastewater) and other sourcesexternal icon (such as, leaking septic tanks or animal waste from farms nearby) and enter swim areas.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater.
Plus, CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus being spread by swallowing or coming in contact with water contaminated by feces (poop) from an infected person.
At lakes, oceans, and rivers with routine water quality monitoring programs, staff look for changes in fecal (poop) contamination of the water.
Water quality advisories and beach closures alert the public to avoid getting in or on the water because of increased fecal contamination.
Learn more about healthy swimming in natural bodies of water and access water quality information by state.
No, do NOT wear a cloth mask in the water.
It can be difficult to breathe through a cloth mask when it is wet.
Plus, wet cloth masks dont slow the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19 as well as dry cloth masks.
All of this means it is particularly important to stay at least 6 feet apart in the water from people you dont live with.
In case cloth masks do get wet by mistake, bring a second (or extra) cloth mask for everyone heading out to the public pool or beach.
CDC does not yet have evidence on the effectiveness of different types of cloth materials.
Wearing cloth masks can help prevent people infected with the virus that causes COVID-19 from spreading the virus.
Make sure your cloth mask:
Cloth masks should NOT be worn by children less than 2 years old or anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Learn more about how to wear, take off, and wash your cloth masks.
The design of the public pool, hot tub, or water playground and surrounding deck and if visitors live together or not will affect how many people can stay at least 6 feet apart from those they dont live with.
CDC recommends operators of public pools, hot tubs, and water playgrounds:
Operators might want to limit the number of people in and around the water so if the water needs to be evacuated (because of lightning or other health or safety threat) social distancing can be maintained on the deck.
Otherwise, if the water is evacuated and social distancing cannot be maintained on the deck, close the deck to visitors.
There is no standard formula to determine how many people can maintain social distancing in the water and on the surrounding deck.
See Considerations for Public Pools, Hot Tubs, and Water Playgrounds for more information.
No.
Only List N disinfectants approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agencyexternal icon should be used to disinfect surfaces (such as handrails and in bathrooms) and shared objects (such as kickboards and pool noodles).
The list includes hundreds of disinfectants.
Operators of public pools, hot tubs, or water playgrounds (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) should consult with the design company or engineer to determine which disinfectants are best suited for surfaces and with manufacturers to determine which disinfectants are best suited for shared objects.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectants.
We dont know yet.
Early scientific data suggest that SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, can be inactivated by the suns UV light.
However, the ability of the suns UV light to inactivate the virus on surfaces (such as handrails and in bathrooms) and shared objects (such as kickboards and pool noodles) needs more research.
Factors — such as cloudiness, latitude (distance from equator), time of day, and amount of time exposed to the suns UV light — will determine how effectively the virus is inactivated.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectantsexternal icon.
The more frequently a surface is touched by multiple people, the more frequently it should be cleaned and then disinfected with a List N disinfectant approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agencyexternal icon.
Frequently touched surfaces should be cleaned and disinfected at least daily.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectants.
No.
RNAexternal icon of the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in feces (poop).
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in feces.
Plus, CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus being spread by swallowing or coming in contact with water contaminated by feces from an infected person.
As a result, CDC has not changed its fecal incident response recommendations.
Remember, do NOT vacuum feces out of the water.
Not when lifeguards are actively lifeguarding.
Lifeguards actively lifeguarding should not be doing other tasks that could distract them.
Drowning deaths have resulted, at least in part, from lifeguards being distracted.
Drowning can occur quickly and quietly.
Learn and take steps to prevent drowning.
Lifeguard trainers can consider the following steps to slow the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19:
CDC has more COVID-19–related considerations for public pools and public beaches and non-COVID-19–related healthy and safe swimming resources.
Help control the spread of rumors and be aware of fraud schemes.
1Fever may be subjective or confirmed
2Close contact is defined as—
a) being within approximately 6 feet (2 meters) of a COVID-19 case for a prolonged period of time; close contact can occur while caring for, living with, visiting, or sharing a health care waiting area or room with a COVID-19 case
b) having direct contact with infectious secretions of a COVID-19 case (e.g being coughed on)
If such contact occurs while not wearing recommended personal protective equipment or PPE (e.g gowns, gloves, NIOSH-certified disposable N95 respirator, eye protection), criteria for PUI consideration are met
See CDCs updated Interim Healthcare Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Persons Under Investigation for 2019 Novel Coronavirus.
Data to inform the definition of close contact are limited.
Considerations when assessing close contact include the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk) and the clinical symptoms of the person with COVID-19 (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk as does exposure to a severely ill patient).
Special consideration should be given to those exposed in health care settings.
A novel coronavirus is a new coronavirus that has not been previously identified.
The virus causing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), is not the same as the coronaviruses that commonly circulate among humans and cause mild illness, like the common cold.
On February 11, 2020 the World Health Organization announced an official name for the disease that is causing the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak, first identified in Wuhan China.
The new name of this disease is coronavirus disease 2019, abbreviated as COVID-19.
In COVID-19, ‘CO stands for ‘corona, ‘VI for ‘virus, and ‘D for disease.
Formerly, this disease was referred to as 2019 novel coronavirus or 2019-nCoV.
There are many types of human coronaviruses including some that commonly cause mild upper-respiratory tract illnesses.
COVID-19 is a new disease, caused by a novel (or new) coronavirus that has not previously been seen in humans.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person to person, mainly through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
Spread is more likely when people are in close contact with one another (within about 6 feet).
COVID-19 seems to be spreading easily and sustainably in the community (community spread) in many affected geographic areas.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
It is not yet known whether weather and temperature affect the spread of COVID-19.
Some other viruses, like those that cause the common cold and flu, spread more during cold weather months but that does not mean it is impossible to become sick with these viruses during other months.
There is much more to learn about the transmissibility, severity, and other features associated with COVID-19 and investigations are ongoing.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Each health department determines community spread differently based on local conditions.
For information on community spread in your area, please visit your health departments website.​
At this time, CDC has no data to suggest that this new coronavirus or other similar coronaviruses are spread by mosquitoes or ticks.
The main way that COVID-19 spreads is from person to person.
See How Coronavirus Spreads for more information.
Visit the How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others page to learn about how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19.
Wear masks in public settings when around people not living in your household and particularly where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, such as grocery stores, pharmacies, and gas stations.
Masks may slow the spread of the virus and help people who may have the virus and do not know it from transmitting it to others.
COVID-19 can be spread by people who do not have symptoms and do not know that they are infected.
Thats why its important for everyone to practice social distancing (staying at least 6 feet away from other people) and wear masks in public settings.
Masks provide an extra layer to help prevent the respiratory droplets from traveling in the air and onto other people.
The masks recommended are not surgical masks or N-95 respirators.
Those are critical supplies that must continue to be reserved for healthcare workers and other medical first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
More information about masks can be found on our masks site.
For more information, see Groups at Higher Risk for Severe Illness.
There is still a lot that is unknown about COVID-19 and how it spreads.
Coronaviruses are thought to be spread most often by respiratory droplets.
Although the virus can survive for a short period on some surfaces, it is unlikely to be spread from domestic or international mail, products or packaging.
However, it may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Learn more about safe handling of deliveries and mail.
In healthcare settings across the United States, donated blood is a lifesaving, essential part of caring for patients.
The need for donated blood is constant, and blood centers are open and in urgent need of donations.
CDC encourages people who are well to continue to donate blood if they are able, even if they are practicing social distancing because of COVID-19.
CDC is supporting blood centers by providing recommendations that will keep donors and staff safe.
Examples of these recommendations include spacing donor chairs 6 feet apart, thoroughly adhering to environmental cleaning practices, and encouraging donors to make donation appointments ahead of time.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Handwashing is one of the best ways to protect yourself and your family from getting sick.
Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing; going to the bathroom; and before eating or preparing food.
If soap and water are not readily available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces such as tables, doorknobs, light switches, countertops, handles, desks, phones, keyboards, toilets, faucets, and sinks.
If surfaces are dirty, clean them using detergent or soap and water prior to disinfection.
To disinfect, most common EPA-registered household disinfectants will work.
See CDCs recommendations for household cleaning and disinfection.
Most people who get COVID-19 will be able to recover at home.
CDC has directions for people who are recovering at home and their caregivers, including:
However, some people may need emergency medical attention.
Watch for symptoms and learn when to seek emergency medical attention.
When to Seek Emergency Medical Attention
Look for emergency warning signs* for COVID-19.
If someone is showing any of these signs, seek emergency medical care immediately
*This list is not all possible symptoms.
Please call your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 or call ahead to your local emergency facility: Notify the operator that you are seeking care for someone who has or may have COVID-19.
Based on available evidence, children do not appear to be at higher risk for COVID-19 than adults.
While some children and infants have been sick with COVID-19, adults make up most of the known cases to date.
However, a few children have developed multisystem inflammatory syndrome (MIS-C).
Currently, information about this syndrome is limited.
CDC is working with state and local health departments to learn more about MIS-C.
You can encourage your child to help stop the spread of COVID-19 by teaching them to do the same things everyone should do to stay healthy.
You can find additional information on preventing COVID-19 at How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others.
More information on Keeping Children Healthy during the COVID-19 Outbreak is available online.
No.
The symptoms of COVID-19 are similar in children and adults.
COVID-19 can look different in different people.
For many people, being sick with COVID-19 would be a little bit like having the flu.
People can get a fever, cough, or have a hard time taking deep breaths.
Most people who have gotten COVID-19 have not gotten very sick.
Only a small group of people who get it have had more serious problems.
CDC and partners are investigating cases of multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) associated with COVID-19.
Learn more about COVID-19 and multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C).
CDC recommends that everyone 2 years and older wear a mask that covers their nose and mouth in public settings when around people not living in your household, particularly where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain.
Masks should NOT be put on babies or children younger than 2 because of the danger of suffocation.
Children younger than 2 years of age are listed as an exception as well as anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Outbreaks can be stressful for adults and children.
When you talk with your child, try to stay calm, and reassure them that they are safe.
Talk to your children about COVID-19 and help them cope with stress.
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) is a condition where different body parts can become inflamed, including the heart, lungs, kidneys, brain, skin, eyes, or gastrointestinal organs.
We do not yet know what causes MIS-C.
However, we know that many children with MIS-C had the virus that causes COVID-19, or had been around someone with COVID-19.
MIS-C can be serious, even deadly, but most children who were diagnosed with this condition have gotten better with medical care.
Contact your childs doctor, nurse, or clinic right away if your child is showing symptoms of MIS-C. Seek emergency care right away if your child is showing any of these emergency warning signs of MIS-C or other concerning signs.
The key to slowing the spread of COVID-19 is to practice social distancing.
While school is out, children should not have in-person playdates with children from other households.
If children are playing outside their own homes, it is essential that they remain 6 feet from anyone who is not in their own household.
Some children with certain underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Make sure children practice everyday preventive behaviors, such as washing their hands often with soap and water.
Remember, if children meet outside of school in groups, it can put everyone at risk.
For more information, see Help Stop the Spread of COVID-19 in Children.
For more information, see Help Children Learn at Home.
Check with your school on plans to continue meal services during the school dismissal.
Many schools are keeping school facilities open to allow families to pick up meals or are providing grab-and-go meals at a central location.
For more information, see Keep Children Healthy during the COVID-19 Outbreak.
Older adults and people who have serious underlying medical conditions are at highest risk of getting sick from COVID-19.
Its not known yet whether all children with underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Although most COVID-19 cases in children are not severe, serious illness that needs to be treated at the hospital still happens.
Some data on children reported that the majority who needed hospitalization for COVID-19 had at least one underlying medical condition.
The most common underlying conditions reported among children with COVID-19 include chronic lung disease (including asthma), heart disease, and conditions that weaken the immune system.
This information suggests that children with these underlying medical conditions may be at risk for more severe illness from COVID-19.
More data are needed to learn which underlying or complex medical conditions may put children at increased risk.
CDC is monitoring new information as it becomes available and will provide updates as needed.
Learn more about caring for children with special health care needs during a disaster and people who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
In addition to following the recommendations to prevent getting sick and running essential errands, families should take extra steps recommended for persons with higher risk of severe COVID-19 illness and steps outlined for those with potential COVID-19 exposure or confirmed illness.
Helping children understand and follow recommendations, like social distancing and wearing masks, can be challenging if your child has intellectual disabilities, sensory issues, or other special healthcare needs.
Supporting children with special healthcare needs can put additional demands and stress on families, especially during emergency situations.
You have likely found ways to manage the stress and challenges unique to your familys situation.
It is important to continue your familys coping methods, including reaching out to other family members, friends, support groups, and organizations that have been helpful in the past.
See information on helping children cope and coping with stress (such as visiting parks, trails, or open spaces) and making your family stronger.
If you, or someone you care about, are feeling overwhelmed with emotions like sadness, depression, or anxiety, or feel like you want to harm yourself or others:
If your child with special healthcare needs becomes sick with symptoms of COVID-19, contact your childs healthcare provider.
If your child has new or worsening emergency warning signs, such as trouble breathing, pain or pressure in the chest, confusion or inability to wake them up, or bluish lips or face, call 911.
If you think your child may have COVID-19, notify the operator so that first responders may be appropriately prepared to protect themselves and others.
Notify your childs healthcare provider if someone else in your house becomes sick with COVID-19, so they can provide any advice specific for your child.
See additional information if someone in the home is sick with COVID-19 or suspected of having COVID-19.
If your childs healthcare provider tells you to go to the hospital for any health problem, including COVID-19
Create a household plan of action to help protect your health and the health of those you care about in the event of an outbreak of COVID-19 in your community:
Plan for potential changes at your workplace.
Talk to your employer about their emergency operations plan, including sick-leave policies and telework options.
Learn how businesses and employers can plan for and respond to COVID-19.
CDC does not encourage the production and use of homemade hand sanitizer products because of concerns over the correct use of the ingredientsexternal icon and the need to work under sterile conditions to make the product.
Local industries that are looking into producing hand sanitizer to fill in for commercial shortages can refer to the World Health Organization guidance.pdf iconexternal icon Organizations should revert to the use of commercially produced, FDA-approved product once such supplies again become available.
People with COVID-19 have reported a wide range of symptoms – from mild symptoms to severe illness.
Symptoms may appear 2-14 days after exposure to the virus.
If you have fever, cough, or other symptoms, you might have COVID-19.
Look for emergency warning signs* for COVID-19.
If someone is showing any of these signs, seek emergency medical care immediately
*This list is not all possible symptoms.
Please call your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 or call ahead to your local emergency facility: Notify the operator that you are seeking care for someone who has or may have COVID-19.
Yes.
It is possible to test positive for flu (as well as other respiratory infections) and COVID-19 at the same time.
Maybe; not everyone needs to be tested for COVID-19.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and want to get tested, call your healthcare provider first.
Most people will have mild illness and can recover at home without medical care and may not need to be tested.
CDC has guidance for who should be tested, but decisions about testing are made by state and local health departments and healthcare providers.
You can also visit your state or local health departments website to look for the latest local information on testing.
Decisions about testing are made by state and localexternal icon health departments or healthcare providers.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and are not tested, it is important to stay home.
What to do if you are sick.
COVID-19 testing differs by location.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and want to get tested, call your healthcare provider first.
You can also visit your state or localexternal icon health departments website to look for the latest local information on testing.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized viral tests that let you collect either a nasal swabexternal icon or a saliva sampleexternal icon at home.
However, you will still need to send your sample to a laboratory for analysis.
If you test positive for COVID-19, know what protective steps to take if you are sick or caring for someone.
If you test negative for COVID-19, you probably were not infected at the time your sample was collected.
However, that does not mean you will not get sick.
The test result only means that you did not have COVID-19 at the time of testing.
You might test negative if the sample was collected early in your infection and test positive later during your illness.
You could also be exposed to COVID-19 after the test and get infected then.
This means you could still spread the virus.
If you develop symptoms later, you might need another test to determine if you are infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.
For more information about viral tests, please visit Test for Current Infection.
Antibody tests for COVID-19 are available through healthcare providers and laboratories.
Check with your healthcare provider to see if they offer antibody tests and whether you should get one.
A positive test result shows you might have antibodies from an infection with the virus that causes COVID-19.
However, there is a chance a positive result means that you have antibodies from an infection with a virus from the same family of viruses (called coronaviruses), such as the one that causes the common cold.
Having antibodies to the virus that causes COVID-19 might provide protection from getting infected with the virus again.
If it does, we do not know how much protection the antibodies might provide or how long this protection might last.
You should continue to protect yourself and others since you could get infected with the virus again.
If you test negative, you might not have ever had COVID-19.
Talk with your healthcare provider about your test result and the type of test you took to understand what your result means.
Regardless of whether you test positive or negative, the results do not confirm whether or not you are able to spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
Until we know more, continue to take steps to protect yourself and others.
If you want more information about antibody tests, see Test for Past Infection.
Yes, it is possible.
You may test negative if the sample was collected early in your infection and test positive later during this illness.
You could also be exposed to COVID-19 after the test and get infected then.
Even if you test negative, you still should take steps to protect yourself and others.
See Testing for Current Infection for more information.
COVID-19 is a new disease and there is limited information regarding risk factors for severe disease.
Based on currently available information and clinical expertise, older adults and people with underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
If you are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19, you should:
Most people with disabilities are not inherently at higher risk for becoming infected with or having severe illness from COVID-19.
Some people with physical limitations or other disabilities might be at a higher risk of infection because of their underlying medical condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Contact tracing has been used for decades by state and local health departments to slow or stop the spread of infectious diseases.
Contact tracing slows the spread of COVID-19 by
During contact tracing, the health department staff will not ask you for
Discussions with health department staff are confidential.
This means that your personal and medical information will be kept private and only shared with those who may need to know, like your health care provider.
If you have been diagnosed with COVID-19, your name will not be shared with those you came in contact with.
The health department will only notify people you were in close contact with (within 6 feet for more than 15 minutes) that they might have been exposed to COVID-19.
Each state and jurisdiction use their own method for collecting and protecting health information.
To learn more, contact your state or local health department.
You may also be interested in: If I participate contact tracing for COVID-19 using a digital tool, is my personal health information secure?
For COVID-19, a close contact is anyone who was within 6 feet of an infected person for at least 15 minutes.
An infected person can spread COVID-19 starting 48 hours (or 2 days) before the person had any symptoms or tested positive for COVID-19.
Yes, you are still considered a close contact even if you were wearing a mask while you were around someone with COVID-19.
Masks are meant to protect other people in case you are infected, and not to protect you from becoming infected.
If you have been around someone who is sick with COVID-19, local authorities, the health department, or your doctor may recommend that you get tested for COVID-19.
The health department may be able to provide resources for testing in your area.
If you are diagnosed with COVID-19, someone from the health department may call you to check on your health, discuss who you have been around, and ask where you spent time while you may have been able to spread COVID-19 to others.
You will also be asked to continue to stay at home and self-isolate, away from others.
Watch for or monitor your symptoms of COVID-19.
If your symptoms worsen or become severe, you should seek medical care.
If you were around someone who has been diagnosed with COVID-19, someone from the health department may call you to let you know that you may have been exposed to COVID-19.
Stay home away from others for 14 days (self-quarantine) after your last contact with that person.
Health department staff will help identify the dates for your self-quarantine.
Health department staff can also provide resources for COVID-19 testing in your area.
Monitor your health and watch for symptoms of COVID-19.
Remember, symptoms may appear 2-14 days after you were exposed to COVID-19.
Tell the health department if you develop any symptoms.
Tell people you were around recently if you become ill, so they can monitor their health.
If your symptoms worsen or become severe, seek medical care.
Severe symptoms include trouble breathing, persistent pain or pressure in the chest, new confusion, inability to wake or stay awake, or bluish lips or face.
The health department staff will not ask you for
Yes.
You should still self-quarantine for 14 days since your last exposure.
It can take up to 14 days after exposure to the virus for a person to develop COVID-19 symptoms.
A negative result before end of the 14-day quarantine period does not rule out possible infection.
By self-quarantining for 14 days, you lower the chance of possibly exposing others to COVID-19.
People with COVID-19 can still spread the virus even if they dont have any symptoms.
If you were around someone who had COVID-19, it is critical that you stay home and away from others for 14 days from the last day that you were around that person.
Staying home and away from others at all times helps your health department in the fight against COVID-19 and helps protect you, your family, and your community.
If you have been around someone who was identified as a close contact to a person with COVID-19, closely monitor yourself for any symptoms of COVID-19.
You do not need to self-quarantine unless you develop symptoms or if the person identified as a close contact develops COVID-19.
No, there will not be a national app for contact tracing.
There are many options available now, and it is up to each state and individual to decide which tools best fit their needs.
Yes, if you agree to participate in contact tracing for COVID-19 with the health department, your information is secure.
Discussions with health department staff are confidential.
This means that your personal and medical information will be kept private and only shared with those who may need to know, like your health care provider.
Your name will not be shared with those you came in contact with.
If you have been diagnosed with COVID-19, the health department will only notify people you were in close contact with (within 6 feet for more than 15 minutes) that they might have been exposed to COVID-19.
Health departments may use case management tools to help make the contact tracing process more efficient.
If you choose to provide information through one of these tools, your information is secure and stored with the health department.
These tools also help health departments quickly receive and analyze information about COVID-19.
Case management tools are under the same laws and regulations for all sensitive health information use (e.g.
HIPPA).
You must provide consent for the health department to collect information using a case management tool.
Just like traditional contact tracing, digital tools will not collect information regarding money, Social Security numbers, bank account information, salary information, or credit card numbers.
Exposure notification tools may be an app that you can download on your personal cell phone.
If you choose to download an exposure notification app for COVID-19, your information is secure.
Exposure notification apps are developed in collaboration with or endorsed by health departments.
These apps undergo rigorous testing to determine their trustworthiness, security, and ability to protect peoples privacy.
Until you give consent to share information with your local health department, any information you have entered into the app is stored only on your personal phone.
Your information is stored only on your own phone and is not sent to the health department or any other third party.
The app and your information can be deleted any time.
When you consent to share your information with the local health department, your information is secure.
No, you are not required to download an app to give information for contact tracing for COVID-19.
Health departments commonly use case management tools to make the contact tracing process more efficient.
These types of tools are not downloaded on personal cell phones.
If you choose to give information to your local or state health department for contact tracing for COVID-19, you do not need to download an app on your cell phone.
The health department staff may call you to
It is up to you to decide if you download an exposure notification app for COVID-19.
There is currently no known risk associated with being in the same room at a funeral or visitation service with the body of someone who died of COVID-19.
See How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others to learn how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19, if you decide to attend a funeral or visitation.
COVID-19 is a new disease and we are still learning how it spreads.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
This type of spread is not a concern after death.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
This is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
People should consider not touching the body of someone who has died of COVID-19.
Older people and people of all ages with severe underlying health conditions are at higher risk of severe illness from COVID-19.
There may be less of a chance of the virus spreading from certain types of touching, such as holding the hand or hugging after the body has been prepared for viewing.
Other activities, such as kissing, washing, and shrouding should be avoided before, during, and after the body has been prepared, if possible.
If washing the body or shrouding are important religious or cultural practices, families are encouraged to work with their communitys cultural and religious leaders and funeral home staff on how to reduce their exposure as much as possible.
At a minimum, people conducting these activities should wear disposable gloves.
If splashing of fluids is expected, additional personal protective equipment (PPE) may be required (such as disposable gown, face shield, or goggles and N-95 respirator).
If desired, you may retrieve the belongings of a loved one who has died of COVID-19 outside their home (for example, in a hospital setting).
Depending on local rules and regulations, family members may retrieve these belongings at the funeral home or the healthcare facility.
You should use gloves and practice good hand hygiene when handling your loved ones belongings.
Depending on the type of belongings, such as electronics, you should also follow the household item-specific cleaning and disinfection guidelines when handling these items.
When a US citizen dies outside the United States, the deceased persons next of kin or legal representative should notify US consular officials at the Department of State.
Consular personnel are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, to provide assistance to US citizens for overseas emergencies.
If a family member, domestic partner, or legal representative is in a different country from the deceased person, he or she should call the Department of States Office of Overseas Citizens Services in Washington, DC, from 8 am to 5 pm Eastern time, Monday through Friday, at 888-407-4747 (toll-free) or 202-501-4444.
For emergency assistance after working hours or on weekends and holidays, call the Department of State switchboard at 202-647-4000 and ask to speak with the Overseas Citizens Services duty officer.
In addition, the US embassyexternal iconexternal iconexternal icon closest to or in the country where the US citizen died can provide assistance.
CDC does not require an autopsy before the remains of a person who died overseas are returned to the United States.
Depending on the circumstances surrounding the death, some countries may require an autopsy.
Sources of support to the family include the local consulate or embassy, travel insurance provider, tour operator, faith-based and aid organizations, and the deceaseds employer.
There likely will need to be an official identification of the body and official documents issued by the consular office.
CDC requirements for importing human remains depend upon if the body has been embalmed, cremated, or if the person died from a quarantinable communicable disease.
At this time, COVID-19 is a quarantinable communicable disease in the United States and the remains must meet the standards for importation found in 42 Code of Federal Regulations Part 71.55 and may be cleared, released, and authorized for entry into the United States only under the following conditions:
Please see CDCs guidance for additional information.
Cleaning with soap and water removes germs, dirt, and impurities from surfaces.
It lowers the risk of spreading infection.
Disinfecting kills germs on surfaces.
By killing germs on a surface after cleaning, it can further lower the risk of spreading infection.
The risk of transmitting or spreading SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, during vacuuming is unknown.
In order to reduce the need for cleaning, disinfection, and vacuuming, consider removing area rugs completely, if possible.
At this time, there are no reported cases of COVID-19 associated with vacuuming.
If vacuuming is necessary or required in a school, business, or community facility that was used by a person with suspected or confirmed COVID-19, first follow the CDC recommendations for Cleaning and Disinfection for Community Facilities that apply, which includes a wait time of 24 hours, or as long as practical.
After cleaning and disinfection, the following recommendations may help reduce the risk to workers and other individuals when vacuuming:
Routine cleaning is the everyday cleaning practices that businesses and communities normally use to maintain a healthy environment.
Surfaces frequently touched by multiple people, such as door handles, bathroom surfaces, and handrails, should be cleaned with soap and water or another detergent at least daily when facilities are in use.
More frequent cleaning and disinfection may be required based on level of use.
For example, certain surfaces and objects in public spaces, such as shopping carts and point of sale keypads, should be cleaned and disinfected before each use.
Cleaning removes dirt and impurities, including germs, from surfaces.
Cleaning alone does not kill germs, but it reduces the number of germs on a surface.
Cleaning does not kill germs, but by removing them, it lowers their numbers and the risk of spreading infection.
If a surface may have gotten the virus on it from a person with or suspected to have COVID-19, the surface should be cleaned and disinfected.
Disinfecting kills germs on surfaces.
Regular cleaning staff can clean and disinfect community spaces.
Cleaning staff should be trained on appropriate use of cleaning and disinfection chemicals and provided with the personal protective equipment (PPE) required for the chemicals used.
Companies do not necessarily need to close after a person with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 has been in a company facility.
The area(s) used or visited by the ill person should be closed for 24 hours or as long as possible.
Open outside doors and windows as much as possible ensuring that doing so does not pose a safety risk to children using the facility (i.e.
make sure that children are not able to enter the closed off area through any windows or doors).
and use ventilating fans to increase air circulation in the area.
Once the area has been appropriately disinfected, it can be opened for use.
Workers without close contact with the person with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 can return to work immediately after disinfection is completed.
The efficacy of these disinfection methods against the virus that causes COVID-19 is not known.
EPA only recommends use of the surface disinfectants identified on List Nexternal icon against the virus that causes COVID-19.
EPA does not routinely review the safety or efficacy of pesticidal devices, such as UV lights, LED lights, or ultrasonic devices.
Therefore, EPA cannot confirm whether, or under what circumstances, such products might be effective against the spread of COVID-19.
Outdoor areas generally require normal routine cleaning and do not require disinfection.
Spraying disinfectant on outdoor playgrounds is not an efficient use of disinfectant supplies and has not been proven to reduce the risk of COVID-19 to the public.
You should maintain existing cleaning and hygiene practices for outdoor areas.
If practical, high touch surfaces made of plastic or metal, such as grab bars and railings, should be cleaned routinely.
Cleaning and disinfection of wooden surfaces (e.g play structures, benches, tables) or groundcovers (e.g mulch, sand) is not recommended.
CDC does not recommend the use of sanitizing tunnels.
There is no evidence that they are effective in reducing the spread of COVID-19.
Chemicals used in sanitizing tunnels could cause skin, eye, or respiratory irritation or damage.
CDC does not recommend disinfection of sidewalks or roads.
Spraying disinfectant on sidewalks and roads is not an efficient use of disinfectant supplies and has not been proven to reduce the risk of COVID-19 to the public.
The risk of spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 from these surfaces is very low and disinfection is not effective on these surfaces.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
See If You Have Pets for more information about pets and COVID-19.
However, since animals can spread other diseases to people, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, such as washing your hands and maintaining good hygiene.
For more information on the many benefits of pet ownership, as well as staying safe and healthy around animals including pets, livestock, and wildlife, visit CDCs Healthy Pets, Healthy People website.
Although we know certain bacteria and fungi can be carried on fur and hair, there is no evidence that viruses, including the virus that causes COVID-19, can spread to people from the skin, fur, or hair of pets.
However, because animals can sometimes carry other germs that can make people sick, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, including washing hands before and after interacting with them.
Dog parks provide socialization and exercise for dogs, which is an important part of their wellbeing.
Because there is a risk that people with COVID-19 could spread it to animals, CDC recommends that you do not let pets interact with people outside of your household, especially in places with community spread of COVID-19.
Therefore, you should consider avoiding dog parks or other places where large numbers of people and dogs gather.
Some areas are allowing dog parks to open.
If you choose to go to a dog park, follow local guidelines.
There are ways to reduce the risk of you or your dog getting infected with COVID-19 if you go to a dog park.
See more information on pets and COVID-19 and recommendations for how to help keep your pet safe.
Until we know more about how this virus affects animals, CDC encourages pet owners to treat pets as you would other human family members to protect them from possible infection.
This means limiting contact between your pets and people outside your household as much as possible and avoiding places where large numbers of people gather.
Some areas are allowing groomers and boarding facilities such as dog daycares to open.
If you must take your pet to a groomer or boarding facility, follow any protocols put into place at the facility, such as wearing a mask and maintaining at least 6 feet of space between yourself and others if possible.
Limit pet items brought from home to the groomer or boarding facility, and disinfect any objects that are taken into a facility and returned home (such as leashes, bowls, and toys).
Use an EPA-registered disinfectantexternal icon to clean items and rinse thoroughly with clean water afterwards.
Do not wipe or bathe your pet with chemical disinfectants, alcohol, hydrogen peroxide, or other products, such as hand sanitizer, counter-cleaning wipes, or other industrial or surface cleaners.
If you have questions about appropriate products for bathing or cleaning your pet, talk to your veterinarian.
Do not put masks on pets, and do not take a sick pet to a groomer or boarding facility.
Signs of sickness in dogs may include fever, coughing, difficulty breathing or shortness of breath, lethargy, sneezing, discharge from the nose or eyes, vomiting, or diarrhea.
If you think your pet is sick, call your veterinarian.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
See more information on pets and COVID-19 and recommendations for how to help keep your pet safe.
Most pets that have gotten sick from the virus that causes COVID-19 were infected after close contact with a person with COVID-19.
Talk to your veterinarian about any health concerns you have about your pets.
If your pet gets sick after contact with a person with COVID-19, call your veterinarian and let them know the pet was around a person with COVID-19.
If you are sick with COVID-19, do not take your pet to the veterinary clinic yourself.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
Routine testing of animals for COVID-19 is not recommended at this time.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
However, it appears that the virus that causes COVID-19 can spread from people to animals after close contact with people with COVID-19.
Until we learn more about how this virus affects animals, use similar precautions for pets and other animals in your facility as you would for other people in your facility.
This will help protect both people and pets in your facility from COVID-19.
Talk to a veterinarian if a pet in your facility gets sick or if you have any concerns about the health of any pets in the facility.
If you think a pet in the facility was exposed to or is showing signs consistent with COVID-19, contact your state health official to discuss guidance on testing pets or other animals for the virus that causes COVID-19.
People who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 should avoid providing care for sick pets, if possible.
For more information, visit CDCs If You Have Pets webpage.
CDC does not have any evidence to suggest that imported animals or animal products pose a risk for spreading COVID-19 in the United States.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
CDC, the U. S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) play distinct but complementary roles in regulating the importation of live animals and animal products into the United States.
Please refer to CDCs requirements for bringing a dog to the United States.
The current requirements for rabies vaccination apply to dogs imported from high-risk countries for rabies.
Imported animals will need to meet CDC and USDAsexternal iconexternal icon requirements for entering the United States.
At this time, there is no evidence that companion animals, including pets and service animals, can spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
As with any animal introduced to a new environment, animals recently imported should be observed daily for signs of illness.
If an animal becomes ill, the animal should be examined by a veterinarian.
Call your local veterinary clinic before bringing the animal into the clinic and let them know that the animal was recently imported from another country.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
Currently, there is no evidence to suggest the virus that causes COVID-19 is circulating in free-living wildlife in the United States, or that wildlife might be a source of infection for people in the United States.
If a wild animal were to become infected with the virus, we dont know whether the infection could then spread among wildlife or if it could spread to other animals, including pets.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals, including wildlife, could be affected by COVID-19.
Because wildlife can carry other diseases, even without looking sick, it is always important to enjoy wildlife from a distance.
Take steps to prevent getting sick from wildlife in the United States:
See COVID-19 and Animals for more information.
Other coronaviruses have been found in North American bats in the past, but there is currently no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 is present in any free-living wildlife in the United States, including bats.
In general, coronaviruses do not cause illness or death in bats, but we dont yet know if this new coronavirus would make North American species of bats sick.
Bats are an important part of natural ecosystems, and their populations are already declining in the United States.
Bat populations could be further threatened by the disease itself or by harm inflicted on bats resulting from a misconception that bats are spreading COVID-19.
However, there is no evidence that bats in the United States are a source of the virus that causes COVID-19 for people.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how bats could be affected by COVID-19.
Currently, there is no evidence that you can get infected with the virus that causes COVID-19 by eating food, including wild hunted game meat.
However, hunters can get infected with other diseases when processing or eating game.
Hunters should always practice good hygiene when processing animals by following these food safety recommendations:
You should follow your state and/or local jurisdictional guidance regarding continuing operations at your facility.
There have not been any reports of horses testing positive for the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
COVID-19 is primarily spread from person to person, so steps should be taken to reduce the risks for people visiting your facility.
For more information, see Guidance on Preparing Workplaces for COVID-19pdf iconexternal icon and Interim Guidance for Businesses and Employers to Plan and Respond to Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Community mitigation is especially important before a vaccine or drug becomes widely available.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
Individual people, communities, schools, businesses, and healthcare organizations have a role to play in community mitigation.
Policies*, which include limits on large gatherings, restrictions on businesses, and school closures are often needed to fully put in place community mitigation strategies.
Each community is unique.
Because some actions can be very disruptive to daily life, mitigation activities will be different depending on how much disease has spread within the community, what the community population is like, and the ability to take these actions at the local level.
To identify appropriate activities, all parts of a community that might be affected need to be considered, including populations most vulnerable to severe illness, and those who might be more affected socially or economically.
When selecting mitigation activities, states and communities need to consider the spread of disease locally, characteristics of the people who live in the community (for example, age groups, languages spoken, overall health status), and the kind of public health resources and healthcare systems (like hospitals) that are available in the community.
State and local officials may need to adjust community mitigation activities and immediately take steps to scale them up or down depending on the changing local situation.
Putting mitigation into practice is based on
*CDC cannot address the policies of any business or organization.
CDC shares recommendations based on the best available science to help people make decisions that improve their health and safety.
In all cases, follow the guidance of your healthcare provider and local health department.
Local decisions depend on local circumstances.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
Currently there is no evidence that people can get COVID-19 by eating or handling food.
It may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object, such as a food package or dining ware that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
There is also no current evidence that people can get COVID-19 by drinking water.
The COVID-19 virus has not been detected in drinking water.
Conventional water treatment methods that use filtration and disinfection, such as those in most municipal drinking water systems, should remove or kill the virus that causes COVID-19.​ Learn more about food and COVID-19.
The virus that causes COVID-19 has not been detected in treated drinking water.
Water treatment plants use filters and disinfectants to remove or kill germs, like the virus that causes COVID-19.
The Environmental Protection Agency regulates water treatment plants to ensure that treated water is safe to drink.
Currently, there is no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 can be spread to people by drinking treated water.
COVID-19 is spread mainly through close contact from person-to-person.
You can continue to use and drink water from your tap as usual.
The virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in the feces of some patients diagnosed with COVID-19.
However, it is unclear whether the virus found in feces may be capable of causing COVID-19.
There has not been any confirmed report of the virus spreading from feces to a person.
Scientists also do not know how much risk there is that the virus could be spread from the feces of an infected person to another person.
However, they think this risk is low based on data from previous outbreaks of diseases caused by related coronaviruses, such as severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS).
Recently, ribonucleic acid (RNA) from the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater, and no information to date that anyone has become sick with COVID-19 because of exposure to wastewater.
At this time, the risk of transmission of the virus that causes COVID-19 through properly designed and maintained sewerage systems is thought to be low.
Recently, ribonucleic acid (RNA) from the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater, and no information to date that anyone has become sick with COVID-19 because of exposure to wastewater.
Standard practices associated with wastewater treatment plant operations should be sufficient to protect wastewater workers from the virus that causes COVID-19.
These standard practices can include engineering and administrative controls, hygiene precautions, specific safe work practices, and personal protective equipment (PPE) normally required when handling untreated wastewater.
No additional COVID-19–specific protections are recommended for workers involved in wastewater management, including those at wastewater treatment facilities.
See Information for Wastewater and Sanitation System Workers on COVID-19 for additional information.
In most cases, it is safe to wash your hands with soap and tap water during a Boil Water Advisory.
Follow the guidance from your local public health officials.
If soap and water are not available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in pools, hot tubs, or water playgrounds.
Plus, proper operation of public pools, hot tubs, and water playgrounds (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) and disinfection of the water (with chlorine or bromine) should inactivate the virus.
The virus mainly spreads when respiratory droplets from infected people land in the mouths or noses of others or possibly when inhaled into the lungs by others.
If a public pool, hot tub, or water playground is open, it is important for all visitors and staff to take steps to slow the spread of the virus:
See Considerations for Public Pools, Hot Tubs, and Water Playgrounds for more information.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in pools, including saltwater pools.
Plus, proper operation of public pools (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) and disinfection of the water (with chlorine or bromine) should inactivate the virus.
Saltwater pools are chlorinated pools.
In traditional pools, chlorine products (such as granules or liquid bleach) are added to the water to disinfect it.
In saltwater pools, table salt (made up of sodium and chloride) is added to the water, and an electrical current is then run through the water with dissolved salt.
This creates the same disinfecting form of chlorine that is created when chlorine products are added to the water in traditional pools.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in lakes, oceans, rivers, or other natural bodies of water.
The virus mainly spreads when respiratory droplets from infected people land in the mouths or noses of others or possibly when inhaled into the lungs by others.
If a public beach or other swim area in a natural body of water is open, it is important for all visitors and staff to take steps to slow the spread of the virus:
See Considerations for Public Beaches for more information.
RNAexternal icon of the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater, which can come from combined sewer overflowsexternal icon (rainwater runoff, domestic sewage, and industrial wastewater) and other sourcesexternal icon (such as, leaking septic tanks or animal waste from farms nearby) and enter swim areas.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater.
Plus, CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus being spread by swallowing or coming in contact with water contaminated by feces (poop) from an infected person.
At lakes, oceans, and rivers with routine water quality monitoring programs, staff look for changes in fecal (poop) contamination of the water.
Water quality advisories and beach closures alert the public to avoid getting in or on the water because of increased fecal contamination.
Learn more about healthy swimming in natural bodies of water and access water quality information by state.
No, do NOT wear a cloth mask in the water.
It can be difficult to breathe through a cloth mask when it is wet.
Plus, wet cloth masks dont slow the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19 as well as dry cloth masks.
All of this means it is particularly important to stay at least 6 feet apart in the water from people you dont live with.
In case cloth masks do get wet by mistake, bring a second (or extra) cloth mask for everyone heading out to the public pool or beach.
CDC does not yet have evidence on the effectiveness of different types of cloth materials.
Wearing cloth masks can help prevent people infected with the virus that causes COVID-19 from spreading the virus.
Make sure your cloth mask:
Cloth masks should NOT be worn by children less than 2 years old or anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Learn more about how to wear, take off, and wash your cloth masks.
The design of the public pool, hot tub, or water playground and surrounding deck and if visitors live together or not will affect how many people can stay at least 6 feet apart from those they dont live with.
CDC recommends operators of public pools, hot tubs, and water playgrounds:
Operators might want to limit the number of people in and around the water so if the water needs to be evacuated (because of lightning or other health or safety threat) social distancing can be maintained on the deck.
Otherwise, if the water is evacuated and social distancing cannot be maintained on the deck, close the deck to visitors.
There is no standard formula to determine how many people can maintain social distancing in the water and on the surrounding deck.
See Considerations for Public Pools, Hot Tubs, and Water Playgrounds for more information.
No.
Only List N disinfectants approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agencyexternal icon should be used to disinfect surfaces (such as handrails and in bathrooms) and shared objects (such as kickboards and pool noodles).
The list includes hundreds of disinfectants.
Operators of public pools, hot tubs, or water playgrounds (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) should consult with the design company or engineer to determine which disinfectants are best suited for surfaces and with manufacturers to determine which disinfectants are best suited for shared objects.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectants.
We dont know yet.
Early scientific data suggest that SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, can be inactivated by the suns UV light.
However, the ability of the suns UV light to inactivate the virus on surfaces (such as handrails and in bathrooms) and shared objects (such as kickboards and pool noodles) needs more research.
Factors — such as cloudiness, latitude (distance from equator), time of day, and amount of time exposed to the suns UV light — will determine how effectively the virus is inactivated.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectantsexternal icon.
The more frequently a surface is touched by multiple people, the more frequently it should be cleaned and then disinfected with a List N disinfectant approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agencyexternal icon.
Frequently touched surfaces should be cleaned and disinfected at least daily.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectants.
No.
RNAexternal icon of the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in feces (poop).
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in feces.
Plus, CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus being spread by swallowing or coming in contact with water contaminated by feces from an infected person.
As a result, CDC has not changed its fecal incident response recommendations.
Remember, do NOT vacuum feces out of the water.
Not when lifeguards are actively lifeguarding.
Lifeguards actively lifeguarding should not be doing other tasks that could distract them.
Drowning deaths have resulted, at least in part, from lifeguards being distracted.
Drowning can occur quickly and quietly.
Learn and take steps to prevent drowning.
Lifeguard trainers can consider the following steps to slow the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19:
CDC has more COVID-19–related considerations for public pools and public beaches and non-COVID-19–related healthy and safe swimming resources.
Help control the spread of rumors and be aware of fraud schemes.
1Fever may be subjective or confirmed
2Close contact is defined as—
a) being within approximately 6 feet (2 meters) of a COVID-19 case for a prolonged period of time; close contact can occur while caring for, living with, visiting, or sharing a health care waiting area or room with a COVID-19 case
b) having direct contact with infectious secretions of a COVID-19 case (e.g being coughed on)
If such contact occurs while not wearing recommended personal protective equipment or PPE (e.g gowns, gloves, NIOSH-certified disposable N95 respirator, eye protection), criteria for PUI consideration are met
See CDCs updated Interim Healthcare Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Persons Under Investigation for 2019 Novel Coronavirus.
Data to inform the definition of close contact are limited.
Considerations when assessing close contact include the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk) and the clinical symptoms of the person with COVID-19 (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk as does exposure to a severely ill patient).
Special consideration should be given to those exposed in health care settings.
A novel coronavirus is a new coronavirus that has not been previously identified.
The virus causing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), is not the same as the coronaviruses that commonly circulate among humans and cause mild illness, like the common cold.
On February 11, 2020 the World Health Organization announced an official name for the disease that is causing the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak, first identified in Wuhan China.
The new name of this disease is coronavirus disease 2019, abbreviated as COVID-19.
In COVID-19, ‘CO stands for ‘corona, ‘VI for ‘virus, and ‘D for disease.
Formerly, this disease was referred to as 2019 novel coronavirus or 2019-nCoV.
There are many types of human coronaviruses including some that commonly cause mild upper-respiratory tract illnesses.
COVID-19 is a new disease, caused by a novel (or new) coronavirus that has not previously been seen in humans.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person to person, mainly through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
Spread is more likely when people are in close contact with one another (within about 6 feet).
COVID-19 seems to be spreading easily and sustainably in the community (community spread) in many affected geographic areas.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
It is not yet known whether weather and temperature affect the spread of COVID-19.
Some other viruses, like those that cause the common cold and flu, spread more during cold weather months but that does not mean it is impossible to become sick with these viruses during other months.
There is much more to learn about the transmissibility, severity, and other features associated with COVID-19 and investigations are ongoing.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Each health department determines community spread differently based on local conditions.
For information on community spread in your area, please visit your health departments website.​
At this time, CDC has no data to suggest that this new coronavirus or other similar coronaviruses are spread by mosquitoes or ticks.
The main way that COVID-19 spreads is from person to person.
See How Coronavirus Spreads for more information.
Visit the How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others page to learn about how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19.
Wear masks in public settings when around people not living in your household and particularly where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, such as grocery stores, pharmacies, and gas stations.
Masks may slow the spread of the virus and help people who may have the virus and do not know it from transmitting it to others.
COVID-19 can be spread by people who do not have symptoms and do not know that they are infected.
Thats why its important for everyone to practice social distancing (staying at least 6 feet away from other people) and wear masks in public settings.
Masks provide an extra layer to help prevent the respiratory droplets from traveling in the air and onto other people.
The masks recommended are not surgical masks or N-95 respirators.
Those are critical supplies that must continue to be reserved for healthcare workers and other medical first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
More information about masks can be found on our masks site.
For more information, see Groups at Higher Risk for Severe Illness.
There is still a lot that is unknown about COVID-19 and how it spreads.
Coronaviruses are thought to be spread most often by respiratory droplets.
Although the virus can survive for a short period on some surfaces, it is unlikely to be spread from domestic or international mail, products or packaging.
However, it may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Learn more about safe handling of deliveries and mail.
In healthcare settings across the United States, donated blood is a lifesaving, essential part of caring for patients.
The need for donated blood is constant, and blood centers are open and in urgent need of donations.
CDC encourages people who are well to continue to donate blood if they are able, even if they are practicing social distancing because of COVID-19.
CDC is supporting blood centers by providing recommendations that will keep donors and staff safe.
Examples of these recommendations include spacing donor chairs 6 feet apart, thoroughly adhering to environmental cleaning practices, and encouraging donors to make donation appointments ahead of time.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Handwashing is one of the best ways to protect yourself and your family from getting sick.
Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing; going to the bathroom; and before eating or preparing food.
If soap and water are not readily available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces such as tables, doorknobs, light switches, countertops, handles, desks, phones, keyboards, toilets, faucets, and sinks.
If surfaces are dirty, clean them using detergent or soap and water prior to disinfection.
To disinfect, most common EPA-registered household disinfectants will work.
See CDCs recommendations for household cleaning and disinfection.
Most people who get COVID-19 will be able to recover at home.
CDC has directions for people who are recovering at home and their caregivers, including:
However, some people may need emergency medical attention.
Watch for symptoms and learn when to seek emergency medical attention.
When to Seek Emergency Medical Attention
Look for emergency warning signs* for COVID-19.
If someone is showing any of these signs, seek emergency medical care immediately
*This list is not all possible symptoms.
Please call your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 or call ahead to your local emergency facility: Notify the operator that you are seeking care for someone who has or may have COVID-19.
Based on available evidence, children do not appear to be at higher risk for COVID-19 than adults.
While some children and infants have been sick with COVID-19, adults make up most of the known cases to date.
However, a few children have developed multisystem inflammatory syndrome (MIS-C).
Currently, information about this syndrome is limited.
CDC is working with state and local health departments to learn more about MIS-C.
You can encourage your child to help stop the spread of COVID-19 by teaching them to do the same things everyone should do to stay healthy.
You can find additional information on preventing COVID-19 at How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others.
More information on Keeping Children Healthy during the COVID-19 Outbreak is available online.
No.
The symptoms of COVID-19 are similar in children and adults.
COVID-19 can look different in different people.
For many people, being sick with COVID-19 would be a little bit like having the flu.
People can get a fever, cough, or have a hard time taking deep breaths.
Most people who have gotten COVID-19 have not gotten very sick.
Only a small group of people who get it have had more serious problems.
CDC and partners are investigating cases of multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) associated with COVID-19.
Learn more about COVID-19 and multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C).
CDC recommends that everyone 2 years and older wear a mask that covers their nose and mouth in public settings when around people not living in your household, particularly where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain.
Masks should NOT be put on babies or children younger than 2 because of the danger of suffocation.
Children younger than 2 years of age are listed as an exception as well as anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Outbreaks can be stressful for adults and children.
When you talk with your child, try to stay calm, and reassure them that they are safe.
Talk to your children about COVID-19 and help them cope with stress.
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) is a condition where different body parts can become inflamed, including the heart, lungs, kidneys, brain, skin, eyes, or gastrointestinal organs.
We do not yet know what causes MIS-C.
However, we know that many children with MIS-C had the virus that causes COVID-19, or had been around someone with COVID-19.
MIS-C can be serious, even deadly, but most children who were diagnosed with this condition have gotten better with medical care.
Contact your childs doctor, nurse, or clinic right away if your child is showing symptoms of MIS-C. Seek emergency care right away if your child is showing any of these emergency warning signs of MIS-C or other concerning signs.
The key to slowing the spread of COVID-19 is to practice social distancing.
While school is out, children should not have in-person playdates with children from other households.
If children are playing outside their own homes, it is essential that they remain 6 feet from anyone who is not in their own household.
Some children with certain underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Make sure children practice everyday preventive behaviors, such as washing their hands often with soap and water.
Remember, if children meet outside of school in groups, it can put everyone at risk.
For more information, see Help Stop the Spread of COVID-19 in Children.
For more information, see Help Children Learn at Home.
Check with your school on plans to continue meal services during the school dismissal.
Many schools are keeping school facilities open to allow families to pick up meals or are providing grab-and-go meals at a central location.
For more information, see Keep Children Healthy during the COVID-19 Outbreak.
Older adults and people who have serious underlying medical conditions are at highest risk of getting sick from COVID-19.
Its not known yet whether all children with underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Although most COVID-19 cases in children are not severe, serious illness that needs to be treated at the hospital still happens.
Some data on children reported that the majority who needed hospitalization for COVID-19 had at least one underlying medical condition.
The most common underlying conditions reported among children with COVID-19 include chronic lung disease (including asthma), heart disease, and conditions that weaken the immune system.
This information suggests that children with these underlying medical conditions may be at risk for more severe illness from COVID-19.
More data are needed to learn which underlying or complex medical conditions may put children at increased risk.
CDC is monitoring new information as it becomes available and will provide updates as needed.
Learn more about caring for children with special health care needs during a disaster and people who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
In addition to following the recommendations to prevent getting sick and running essential errands, families should take extra steps recommended for persons with higher risk of severe COVID-19 illness and steps outlined for those with potential COVID-19 exposure or confirmed illness.
Helping children understand and follow recommendations, like social distancing and wearing masks, can be challenging if your child has intellectual disabilities, sensory issues, or other special healthcare needs.
Supporting children with special healthcare needs can put additional demands and stress on families, especially during emergency situations.
You have likely found ways to manage the stress and challenges unique to your familys situation.
It is important to continue your familys coping methods, including reaching out to other family members, friends, support groups, and organizations that have been helpful in the past.
See information on helping children cope and coping with stress (such as visiting parks, trails, or open spaces) and making your family stronger.
If you, or someone you care about, are feeling overwhelmed with emotions like sadness, depression, or anxiety, or feel like you want to harm yourself or others:
If your child with special healthcare needs becomes sick with symptoms of COVID-19, contact your childs healthcare provider.
If your child has new or worsening emergency warning signs, such as trouble breathing, pain or pressure in the chest, confusion or inability to wake them up, or bluish lips or face, call 911.
If you think your child may have COVID-19, notify the operator so that first responders may be appropriately prepared to protect themselves and others.
Notify your childs healthcare provider if someone else in your house becomes sick with COVID-19, so they can provide any advice specific for your child.
See additional information if someone in the home is sick with COVID-19 or suspected of having COVID-19.
If your childs healthcare provider tells you to go to the hospital for any health problem, including COVID-19
Create a household plan of action to help protect your health and the health of those you care about in the event of an outbreak of COVID-19 in your community:
Plan for potential changes at your workplace.
Talk to your employer about their emergency operations plan, including sick-leave policies and telework options.
Learn how businesses and employers can plan for and respond to COVID-19.
CDC does not encourage the production and use of homemade hand sanitizer products because of concerns over the correct use of the ingredientsexternal icon and the need to work under sterile conditions to make the product.
Local industries that are looking into producing hand sanitizer to fill in for commercial shortages can refer to the World Health Organization guidance.pdf iconexternal icon Organizations should revert to the use of commercially produced, FDA-approved product once such supplies again become available.
People with COVID-19 have reported a wide range of symptoms – from mild symptoms to severe illness.
Symptoms may appear 2-14 days after exposure to the virus.
If you have fever, cough, or other symptoms, you might have COVID-19.
Look for emergency warning signs* for COVID-19.
If someone is showing any of these signs, seek emergency medical care immediately
*This list is not all possible symptoms.
Please call your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 or call ahead to your local emergency facility: Notify the operator that you are seeking care for someone who has or may have COVID-19.
Yes.
It is possible to test positive for flu (as well as other respiratory infections) and COVID-19 at the same time.
Maybe; not everyone needs to be tested for COVID-19.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and want to get tested, call your healthcare provider first.
Most people will have mild illness and can recover at home without medical care and may not need to be tested.
CDC has guidance for who should be tested, but decisions about testing are made by state and local health departments and healthcare providers.
You can also visit your state or local health departments website to look for the latest local information on testing.
Decisions about testing are made by state and localexternal icon health departments or healthcare providers.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and are not tested, it is important to stay home.
What to do if you are sick.
COVID-19 testing differs by location.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and want to get tested, call your healthcare provider first.
You can also visit your state or localexternal icon health departments website to look for the latest local information on testing.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized viral tests that let you collect either a nasal swabexternal icon or a saliva sampleexternal icon at home.
However, you will still need to send your sample to a laboratory for analysis.
If you test positive for COVID-19, know what protective steps to take if you are sick or caring for someone.
If you test negative for COVID-19, you probably were not infected at the time your sample was collected.
However, that does not mean you will not get sick.
The test result only means that you did not have COVID-19 at the time of testing.
You might test negative if the sample was collected early in your infection and test positive later during your illness.
You could also be exposed to COVID-19 after the test and get infected then.
This means you could still spread the virus.
If you develop symptoms later, you might need another test to determine if you are infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.
For more information about viral tests, please visit Test for Current Infection.
Antibody tests for COVID-19 are available through healthcare providers and laboratories.
Check with your healthcare provider to see if they offer antibody tests and whether you should get one.
A positive test result shows you might have antibodies from an infection with the virus that causes COVID-19.
However, there is a chance a positive result means that you have antibodies from an infection with a virus from the same family of viruses (called coronaviruses), such as the one that causes the common cold.
Having antibodies to the virus that causes COVID-19 might provide protection from getting infected with the virus again.
If it does, we do not know how much protection the antibodies might provide or how long this protection might last.
You should continue to protect yourself and others since you could get infected with the virus again.
If you test negative, you might not have ever had COVID-19.
Talk with your healthcare provider about your test result and the type of test you took to understand what your result means.
Regardless of whether you test positive or negative, the results do not confirm whether or not you are able to spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
Until we know more, continue to take steps to protect yourself and others.
If you want more information about antibody tests, see Test for Past Infection.
Yes, it is possible.
You may test negative if the sample was collected early in your infection and test positive later during this illness.
You could also be exposed to COVID-19 after the test and get infected then.
Even if you test negative, you still should take steps to protect yourself and others.
See Testing for Current Infection for more information.
COVID-19 is a new disease and there is limited information regarding risk factors for severe disease.
Based on currently available information and clinical expertise, older adults and people with underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
If you are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19, you should:
Most people with disabilities are not inherently at higher risk for becoming infected with or having severe illness from COVID-19.
Some people with physical limitations or other disabilities might be at a higher risk of infection because of their underlying medical condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Contact tracing has been used for decades by state and local health departments to slow or stop the spread of infectious diseases.
Contact tracing slows the spread of COVID-19 by
During contact tracing, the health department staff will not ask you for
Discussions with health department staff are confidential.
This means that your personal and medical information will be kept private and only shared with those who may need to know, like your health care provider.
If you have been diagnosed with COVID-19, your name will not be shared with those you came in contact with.
The health department will only notify people you were in close contact with (within 6 feet for more than 15 minutes) that they might have been exposed to COVID-19.
Each state and jurisdiction use their own method for collecting and protecting health information.
To learn more, contact your state or local health department.
You may also be interested in: If I participate contact tracing for COVID-19 using a digital tool, is my personal health information secure?
For COVID-19, a close contact is anyone who was within 6 feet of an infected person for at least 15 minutes.
An infected person can spread COVID-19 starting 48 hours (or 2 days) before the person had any symptoms or tested positive for COVID-19.
Yes, you are still considered a close contact even if you were wearing a mask while you were around someone with COVID-19.
Masks are meant to protect other people in case you are infected, and not to protect you from becoming infected.
If you have been around someone who is sick with COVID-19, local authorities, the health department, or your doctor may recommend that you get tested for COVID-19.
The health department may be able to provide resources for testing in your area.
If you are diagnosed with COVID-19, someone from the health department may call you to check on your health, discuss who you have been around, and ask where you spent time while you may have been able to spread COVID-19 to others.
You will also be asked to continue to stay at home and self-isolate, away from others.
Watch for or monitor your symptoms of COVID-19.
If your symptoms worsen or become severe, you should seek medical care.
If you were around someone who has been diagnosed with COVID-19, someone from the health department may call you to let you know that you may have been exposed to COVID-19.
Stay home away from others for 14 days (self-quarantine) after your last contact with that person.
Health department staff will help identify the dates for your self-quarantine.
Health department staff can also provide resources for COVID-19 testing in your area.
Monitor your health and watch for symptoms of COVID-19.
Remember, symptoms may appear 2-14 days after you were exposed to COVID-19.
Tell the health department if you develop any symptoms.
Tell people you were around recently if you become ill, so they can monitor their health.
If your symptoms worsen or become severe, seek medical care.
Severe symptoms include trouble breathing, persistent pain or pressure in the chest, new confusion, inability to wake or stay awake, or bluish lips or face.
The health department staff will not ask you for
Yes.
You should still self-quarantine for 14 days since your last exposure.
It can take up to 14 days after exposure to the virus for a person to develop COVID-19 symptoms.
A negative result before end of the 14-day quarantine period does not rule out possible infection.
By self-quarantining for 14 days, you lower the chance of possibly exposing others to COVID-19.
People with COVID-19 can still spread the virus even if they dont have any symptoms.
If you were around someone who had COVID-19, it is critical that you stay home and away from others for 14 days from the last day that you were around that person.
Staying home and away from others at all times helps your health department in the fight against COVID-19 and helps protect you, your family, and your community.
If you have been around someone who was identified as a close contact to a person with COVID-19, closely monitor yourself for any symptoms of COVID-19.
You do not need to self-quarantine unless you develop symptoms or if the person identified as a close contact develops COVID-19.
No, there will not be a national app for contact tracing.
There are many options available now, and it is up to each state and individual to decide which tools best fit their needs.
Yes, if you agree to participate in contact tracing for COVID-19 with the health department, your information is secure.
Discussions with health department staff are confidential.
This means that your personal and medical information will be kept private and only shared with those who may need to know, like your health care provider.
Your name will not be shared with those you came in contact with.
If you have been diagnosed with COVID-19, the health department will only notify people you were in close contact with (within 6 feet for more than 15 minutes) that they might have been exposed to COVID-19.
Health departments may use case management tools to help make the contact tracing process more efficient.
If you choose to provide information through one of these tools, your information is secure and stored with the health department.
These tools also help health departments quickly receive and analyze information about COVID-19.
Case management tools are under the same laws and regulations for all sensitive health information use (e.g.
HIPPA).
You must provide consent for the health department to collect information using a case management tool.
Just like traditional contact tracing, digital tools will not collect information regarding money, Social Security numbers, bank account information, salary information, or credit card numbers.
Exposure notification tools may be an app that you can download on your personal cell phone.
If you choose to download an exposure notification app for COVID-19, your information is secure.
Exposure notification apps are developed in collaboration with or endorsed by health departments.
These apps undergo rigorous testing to determine their trustworthiness, security, and ability to protect peoples privacy.
Until you give consent to share information with your local health department, any information you have entered into the app is stored only on your personal phone.
Your information is stored only on your own phone and is not sent to the health department or any other third party.
The app and your information can be deleted any time.
When you consent to share your information with the local health department, your information is secure.
No, you are not required to download an app to give information for contact tracing for COVID-19.
Health departments commonly use case management tools to make the contact tracing process more efficient.
These types of tools are not downloaded on personal cell phones.
If you choose to give information to your local or state health department for contact tracing for COVID-19, you do not need to download an app on your cell phone.
The health department staff may call you to
It is up to you to decide if you download an exposure notification app for COVID-19.
There is currently no known risk associated with being in the same room at a funeral or visitation service with the body of someone who died of COVID-19.
See How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others to learn how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19, if you decide to attend a funeral or visitation.
COVID-19 is a new disease and we are still learning how it spreads.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
This type of spread is not a concern after death.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
This is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
People should consider not touching the body of someone who has died of COVID-19.
Older people and people of all ages with severe underlying health conditions are at higher risk of severe illness from COVID-19.
There may be less of a chance of the virus spreading from certain types of touching, such as holding the hand or hugging after the body has been prepared for viewing.
Other activities, such as kissing, washing, and shrouding should be avoided before, during, and after the body has been prepared, if possible.
If washing the body or shrouding are important religious or cultural practices, families are encouraged to work with their communitys cultural and religious leaders and funeral home staff on how to reduce their exposure as much as possible.
At a minimum, people conducting these activities should wear disposable gloves.
If splashing of fluids is expected, additional personal protective equipment (PPE) may be required (such as disposable gown, face shield, or goggles and N-95 respirator).
If desired, you may retrieve the belongings of a loved one who has died of COVID-19 outside their home (for example, in a hospital setting).
Depending on local rules and regulations, family members may retrieve these belongings at the funeral home or the healthcare facility.
You should use gloves and practice good hand hygiene when handling your loved ones belongings.
Depending on the type of belongings, such as electronics, you should also follow the household item-specific cleaning and disinfection guidelines when handling these items.
When a US citizen dies outside the United States, the deceased persons next of kin or legal representative should notify US consular officials at the Department of State.
Consular personnel are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, to provide assistance to US citizens for overseas emergencies.
If a family member, domestic partner, or legal representative is in a different country from the deceased person, he or she should call the Department of States Office of Overseas Citizens Services in Washington, DC, from 8 am to 5 pm Eastern time, Monday through Friday, at 888-407-4747 (toll-free) or 202-501-4444.
For emergency assistance after working hours or on weekends and holidays, call the Department of State switchboard at 202-647-4000 and ask to speak with the Overseas Citizens Services duty officer.
In addition, the US embassyexternal iconexternal iconexternal icon closest to or in the country where the US citizen died can provide assistance.
CDC does not require an autopsy before the remains of a person who died overseas are returned to the United States.
Depending on the circumstances surrounding the death, some countries may require an autopsy.
Sources of support to the family include the local consulate or embassy, travel insurance provider, tour operator, faith-based and aid organizations, and the deceaseds employer.
There likely will need to be an official identification of the body and official documents issued by the consular office.
CDC requirements for importing human remains depend upon if the body has been embalmed, cremated, or if the person died from a quarantinable communicable disease.
At this time, COVID-19 is a quarantinable communicable disease in the United States and the remains must meet the standards for importation found in 42 Code of Federal Regulations Part 71.55 and may be cleared, released, and authorized for entry into the United States only under the following conditions:
Please see CDCs guidance for additional information.
Cleaning with soap and water removes germs, dirt, and impurities from surfaces.
It lowers the risk of spreading infection.
Disinfecting kills germs on surfaces.
By killing germs on a surface after cleaning, it can further lower the risk of spreading infection.
The risk of transmitting or spreading SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, during vacuuming is unknown.
In order to reduce the need for cleaning, disinfection, and vacuuming, consider removing area rugs completely, if possible.
At this time, there are no reported cases of COVID-19 associated with vacuuming.
If vacuuming is necessary or required in a school, business, or community facility that was used by a person with suspected or confirmed COVID-19, first follow the CDC recommendations for Cleaning and Disinfection for Community Facilities that apply, which includes a wait time of 24 hours, or as long as practical.
After cleaning and disinfection, the following recommendations may help reduce the risk to workers and other individuals when vacuuming:
Routine cleaning is the everyday cleaning practices that businesses and communities normally use to maintain a healthy environment.
Surfaces frequently touched by multiple people, such as door handles, bathroom surfaces, and handrails, should be cleaned with soap and water or another detergent at least daily when facilities are in use.
More frequent cleaning and disinfection may be required based on level of use.
For example, certain surfaces and objects in public spaces, such as shopping carts and point of sale keypads, should be cleaned and disinfected before each use.
Cleaning removes dirt and impurities, including germs, from surfaces.
Cleaning alone does not kill germs, but it reduces the number of germs on a surface.
Cleaning does not kill germs, but by removing them, it lowers their numbers and the risk of spreading infection.
If a surface may have gotten the virus on it from a person with or suspected to have COVID-19, the surface should be cleaned and disinfected.
Disinfecting kills germs on surfaces.
Regular cleaning staff can clean and disinfect community spaces.
Cleaning staff should be trained on appropriate use of cleaning and disinfection chemicals and provided with the personal protective equipment (PPE) required for the chemicals used.
Companies do not necessarily need to close after a person with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 has been in a company facility.
The area(s) used or visited by the ill person should be closed for 24 hours or as long as possible.
Open outside doors and windows as much as possible ensuring that doing so does not pose a safety risk to children using the facility (i.e.
make sure that children are not able to enter the closed off area through any windows or doors).
and use ventilating fans to increase air circulation in the area.
Once the area has been appropriately disinfected, it can be opened for use.
Workers without close contact with the person with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 can return to work immediately after disinfection is completed.
The efficacy of these disinfection methods against the virus that causes COVID-19 is not known.
EPA only recommends use of the surface disinfectants identified on List Nexternal icon against the virus that causes COVID-19.
EPA does not routinely review the safety or efficacy of pesticidal devices, such as UV lights, LED lights, or ultrasonic devices.
Therefore, EPA cannot confirm whether, or under what circumstances, such products might be effective against the spread of COVID-19.
Outdoor areas generally require normal routine cleaning and do not require disinfection.
Spraying disinfectant on outdoor playgrounds is not an efficient use of disinfectant supplies and has not been proven to reduce the risk of COVID-19 to the public.
You should maintain existing cleaning and hygiene practices for outdoor areas.
If practical, high touch surfaces made of plastic or metal, such as grab bars and railings, should be cleaned routinely.
Cleaning and disinfection of wooden surfaces (e.g play structures, benches, tables) or groundcovers (e.g mulch, sand) is not recommended.
CDC does not recommend the use of sanitizing tunnels.
There is no evidence that they are effective in reducing the spread of COVID-19.
Chemicals used in sanitizing tunnels could cause skin, eye, or respiratory irritation or damage.
CDC does not recommend disinfection of sidewalks or roads.
Spraying disinfectant on sidewalks and roads is not an efficient use of disinfectant supplies and has not been proven to reduce the risk of COVID-19 to the public.
The risk of spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 from these surfaces is very low and disinfection is not effective on these surfaces.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
See If You Have Pets for more information about pets and COVID-19.
However, since animals can spread other diseases to people, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, such as washing your hands and maintaining good hygiene.
For more information on the many benefits of pet ownership, as well as staying safe and healthy around animals including pets, livestock, and wildlife, visit CDCs Healthy Pets, Healthy People website.
Although we know certain bacteria and fungi can be carried on fur and hair, there is no evidence that viruses, including the virus that causes COVID-19, can spread to people from the skin, fur, or hair of pets.
However, because animals can sometimes carry other germs that can make people sick, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, including washing hands before and after interacting with them.
Dog parks provide socialization and exercise for dogs, which is an important part of their wellbeing.
Because there is a risk that people with COVID-19 could spread it to animals, CDC recommends that you do not let pets interact with people outside of your household, especially in places with community spread of COVID-19.
Therefore, you should consider avoiding dog parks or other places where large numbers of people and dogs gather.
Some areas are allowing dog parks to open.
If you choose to go to a dog park, follow local guidelines.
There are ways to reduce the risk of you or your dog getting infected with COVID-19 if you go to a dog park.
See more information on pets and COVID-19 and recommendations for how to help keep your pet safe.
Until we know more about how this virus affects animals, CDC encourages pet owners to treat pets as you would other human family members to protect them from possible infection.
This means limiting contact between your pets and people outside your household as much as possible and avoiding places where large numbers of people gather.
Some areas are allowing groomers and boarding facilities such as dog daycares to open.
If you must take your pet to a groomer or boarding facility, follow any protocols put into place at the facility, such as wearing a mask and maintaining at least 6 feet of space between yourself and others if possible.
Limit pet items brought from home to the groomer or boarding facility, and disinfect any objects that are taken into a facility and returned home (such as leashes, bowls, and toys).
Use an EPA-registered disinfectantexternal icon to clean items and rinse thoroughly with clean water afterwards.
Do not wipe or bathe your pet with chemical disinfectants, alcohol, hydrogen peroxide, or other products, such as hand sanitizer, counter-cleaning wipes, or other industrial or surface cleaners.
If you have questions about appropriate products for bathing or cleaning your pet, talk to your veterinarian.
Do not put masks on pets, and do not take a sick pet to a groomer or boarding facility.
Signs of sickness in dogs may include fever, coughing, difficulty breathing or shortness of breath, lethargy, sneezing, discharge from the nose or eyes, vomiting, or diarrhea.
If you think your pet is sick, call your veterinarian.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
See more information on pets and COVID-19 and recommendations for how to help keep your pet safe.
Most pets that have gotten sick from the virus that causes COVID-19 were infected after close contact with a person with COVID-19.
Talk to your veterinarian about any health concerns you have about your pets.
If your pet gets sick after contact with a person with COVID-19, call your veterinarian and let them know the pet was around a person with COVID-19.
If you are sick with COVID-19, do not take your pet to the veterinary clinic yourself.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
Routine testing of animals for COVID-19 is not recommended at this time.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
However, it appears that the virus that causes COVID-19 can spread from people to animals after close contact with people with COVID-19.
Until we learn more about how this virus affects animals, use similar precautions for pets and other animals in your facility as you would for other people in your facility.
This will help protect both people and pets in your facility from COVID-19.
Talk to a veterinarian if a pet in your facility gets sick or if you have any concerns about the health of any pets in the facility.
If you think a pet in the facility was exposed to or is showing signs consistent with COVID-19, contact your state health official to discuss guidance on testing pets or other animals for the virus that causes COVID-19.
People who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 should avoid providing care for sick pets, if possible.
For more information, visit CDCs If You Have Pets webpage.
CDC does not have any evidence to suggest that imported animals or animal products pose a risk for spreading COVID-19 in the United States.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
CDC, the U. S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) play distinct but complementary roles in regulating the importation of live animals and animal products into the United States.
Please refer to CDCs requirements for bringing a dog to the United States.
The current requirements for rabies vaccination apply to dogs imported from high-risk countries for rabies.
Imported animals will need to meet CDC and USDAsexternal iconexternal icon requirements for entering the United States.
At this time, there is no evidence that companion animals, including pets and service animals, can spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
As with any animal introduced to a new environment, animals recently imported should be observed daily for signs of illness.
If an animal becomes ill, the animal should be examined by a veterinarian.
Call your local veterinary clinic before bringing the animal into the clinic and let them know that the animal was recently imported from another country.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
Currently, there is no evidence to suggest the virus that causes COVID-19 is circulating in free-living wildlife in the United States, or that wildlife might be a source of infection for people in the United States.
If a wild animal were to become infected with the virus, we dont know whether the infection could then spread among wildlife or if it could spread to other animals, including pets.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals, including wildlife, could be affected by COVID-19.
Because wildlife can carry other diseases, even without looking sick, it is always important to enjoy wildlife from a distance.
Take steps to prevent getting sick from wildlife in the United States:
See COVID-19 and Animals for more information.
Other coronaviruses have been found in North American bats in the past, but there is currently no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 is present in any free-living wildlife in the United States, including bats.
In general, coronaviruses do not cause illness or death in bats, but we dont yet know if this new coronavirus would make North American species of bats sick.
Bats are an important part of natural ecosystems, and their populations are already declining in the United States.
Bat populations could be further threatened by the disease itself or by harm inflicted on bats resulting from a misconception that bats are spreading COVID-19.
However, there is no evidence that bats in the United States are a source of the virus that causes COVID-19 for people.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how bats could be affected by COVID-19.
Currently, there is no evidence that you can get infected with the virus that causes COVID-19 by eating food, including wild hunted game meat.
However, hunters can get infected with other diseases when processing or eating game.
Hunters should always practice good hygiene when processing animals by following these food safety recommendations:
You should follow your state and/or local jurisdictional guidance regarding continuing operations at your facility.
There have not been any reports of horses testing positive for the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
COVID-19 is primarily spread from person to person, so steps should be taken to reduce the risks for people visiting your facility.
For more information, see Guidance on Preparing Workplaces for COVID-19pdf iconexternal icon and Interim Guidance for Businesses and Employers to Plan and Respond to Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Community mitigation is especially important before a vaccine or drug becomes widely available.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
Individual people, communities, schools, businesses, and healthcare organizations have a role to play in community mitigation.
Policies*, which include limits on large gatherings, restrictions on businesses, and school closures are often needed to fully put in place community mitigation strategies.
Each community is unique.
Because some actions can be very disruptive to daily life, mitigation activities will be different depending on how much disease has spread within the community, what the community population is like, and the ability to take these actions at the local level.
To identify appropriate activities, all parts of a community that might be affected need to be considered, including populations most vulnerable to severe illness, and those who might be more affected socially or economically.
When selecting mitigation activities, states and communities need to consider the spread of disease locally, characteristics of the people who live in the community (for example, age groups, languages spoken, overall health status), and the kind of public health resources and healthcare systems (like hospitals) that are available in the community.
State and local officials may need to adjust community mitigation activities and immediately take steps to scale them up or down depending on the changing local situation.
Putting mitigation into practice is based on
*CDC cannot address the policies of any business or organization.
CDC shares recommendations based on the best available science to help people make decisions that improve their health and safety.
In all cases, follow the guidance of your healthcare provider and local health department.
Local decisions depend on local circumstances.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
Currently there is no evidence that people can get COVID-19 by eating or handling food.
It may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object, such as a food package or dining ware that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
There is also no current evidence that people can get COVID-19 by drinking water.
The COVID-19 virus has not been detected in drinking water.
Conventional water treatment methods that use filtration and disinfection, such as those in most municipal drinking water systems, should remove or kill the virus that causes COVID-19.​ Learn more about food and COVID-19.
The virus that causes COVID-19 has not been detected in treated drinking water.
Water treatment plants use filters and disinfectants to remove or kill germs, like the virus that causes COVID-19.
The Environmental Protection Agency regulates water treatment plants to ensure that treated water is safe to drink.
Currently, there is no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 can be spread to people by drinking treated water.
COVID-19 is spread mainly through close contact from person-to-person.
You can continue to use and drink water from your tap as usual.
The virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in the feces of some patients diagnosed with COVID-19.
However, it is unclear whether the virus found in feces may be capable of causing COVID-19.
There has not been any confirmed report of the virus spreading from feces to a person.
Scientists also do not know how much risk there is that the virus could be spread from the feces of an infected person to another person.
However, they think this risk is low based on data from previous outbreaks of diseases caused by related coronaviruses, such as severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS).
Recently, ribonucleic acid (RNA) from the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater, and no information to date that anyone has become sick with COVID-19 because of exposure to wastewater.
At this time, the risk of transmission of the virus that causes COVID-19 through properly designed and maintained sewerage systems is thought to be low.
Recently, ribonucleic acid (RNA) from the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater, and no information to date that anyone has become sick with COVID-19 because of exposure to wastewater.
Standard practices associated with wastewater treatment plant operations should be sufficient to protect wastewater workers from the virus that causes COVID-19.
These standard practices can include engineering and administrative controls, hygiene precautions, specific safe work practices, and personal protective equipment (PPE) normally required when handling untreated wastewater.
No additional COVID-19–specific protections are recommended for workers involved in wastewater management, including those at wastewater treatment facilities.
See Information for Wastewater and Sanitation System Workers on COVID-19 for additional information.
In most cases, it is safe to wash your hands with soap and tap water during a Boil Water Advisory.
Follow the guidance from your local public health officials.
If soap and water are not available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in pools, hot tubs, or water playgrounds.
Plus, proper operation of public pools, hot tubs, and water playgrounds (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) and disinfection of the water (with chlorine or bromine) should inactivate the virus.
The virus mainly spreads when respiratory droplets from infected people land in the mouths or noses of others or possibly when inhaled into the lungs by others.
If a public pool, hot tub, or water playground is open, it is important for all visitors and staff to take steps to slow the spread of the virus:
See Considerations for Public Pools, Hot Tubs, and Water Playgrounds for more information.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in pools, including saltwater pools.
Plus, proper operation of public pools (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) and disinfection of the water (with chlorine or bromine) should inactivate the virus.
Saltwater pools are chlorinated pools.
In traditional pools, chlorine products (such as granules or liquid bleach) are added to the water to disinfect it.
In saltwater pools, table salt (made up of sodium and chloride) is added to the water, and an electrical current is then run through the water with dissolved salt.
This creates the same disinfecting form of chlorine that is created when chlorine products are added to the water in traditional pools.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in lakes, oceans, rivers, or other natural bodies of water.
The virus mainly spreads when respiratory droplets from infected people land in the mouths or noses of others or possibly when inhaled into the lungs by others.
If a public beach or other swim area in a natural body of water is open, it is important for all visitors and staff to take steps to slow the spread of the virus:
See Considerations for Public Beaches for more information.
RNAexternal icon of the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater, which can come from combined sewer overflowsexternal icon (rainwater runoff, domestic sewage, and industrial wastewater) and other sourcesexternal icon (such as, leaking septic tanks or animal waste from farms nearby) and enter swim areas.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater.
Plus, CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus being spread by swallowing or coming in contact with water contaminated by feces (poop) from an infected person.
At lakes, oceans, and rivers with routine water quality monitoring programs, staff look for changes in fecal (poop) contamination of the water.
Water quality advisories and beach closures alert the public to avoid getting in or on the water because of increased fecal contamination.
Learn more about healthy swimming in natural bodies of water and access water quality information by state.
No, do NOT wear a cloth mask in the water.
It can be difficult to breathe through a cloth mask when it is wet.
Plus, wet cloth masks dont slow the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19 as well as dry cloth masks.
All of this means it is particularly important to stay at least 6 feet apart in the water from people you dont live with.
In case cloth masks do get wet by mistake, bring a second (or extra) cloth mask for everyone heading out to the public pool or beach.
CDC does not yet have evidence on the effectiveness of different types of cloth materials.
Wearing cloth masks can help prevent people infected with the virus that causes COVID-19 from spreading the virus.
Make sure your cloth mask:
Cloth masks should NOT be worn by children less than 2 years old or anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Learn more about how to wear, take off, and wash your cloth masks.
The design of the public pool, hot tub, or water playground and surrounding deck and if visitors live together or not will affect how many people can stay at least 6 feet apart from those they dont live with.
CDC recommends operators of public pools, hot tubs, and water playgrounds:
Operators might want to limit the number of people in and around the water so if the water needs to be evacuated (because of lightning or other health or safety threat) social distancing can be maintained on the deck.
Otherwise, if the water is evacuated and social distancing cannot be maintained on the deck, close the deck to visitors.
There is no standard formula to determine how many people can maintain social distancing in the water and on the surrounding deck.
See Considerations for Public Pools, Hot Tubs, and Water Playgrounds for more information.
No.
Only List N disinfectants approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agencyexternal icon should be used to disinfect surfaces (such as handrails and in bathrooms) and shared objects (such as kickboards and pool noodles).
The list includes hundreds of disinfectants.
Operators of public pools, hot tubs, or water playgrounds (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) should consult with the design company or engineer to determine which disinfectants are best suited for surfaces and with manufacturers to determine which disinfectants are best suited for shared objects.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectants.
We dont know yet.
Early scientific data suggest that SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, can be inactivated by the suns UV light.
However, the ability of the suns UV light to inactivate the virus on surfaces (such as handrails and in bathrooms) and shared objects (such as kickboards and pool noodles) needs more research.
Factors — such as cloudiness, latitude (distance from equator), time of day, and amount of time exposed to the suns UV light — will determine how effectively the virus is inactivated.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectantsexternal icon.
The more frequently a surface is touched by multiple people, the more frequently it should be cleaned and then disinfected with a List N disinfectant approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agencyexternal icon.
Frequently touched surfaces should be cleaned and disinfected at least daily.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectants.
No.
RNAexternal icon of the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in feces (poop).
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in feces.
Plus, CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus being spread by swallowing or coming in contact with water contaminated by feces from an infected person.
As a result, CDC has not changed its fecal incident response recommendations.
Remember, do NOT vacuum feces out of the water.
Not when lifeguards are actively lifeguarding.
Lifeguards actively lifeguarding should not be doing other tasks that could distract them.
Drowning deaths have resulted, at least in part, from lifeguards being distracted.
Drowning can occur quickly and quietly.
Learn and take steps to prevent drowning.
Lifeguard trainers can consider the following steps to slow the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19:
CDC has more COVID-19–related considerations for public pools and public beaches and non-COVID-19–related healthy and safe swimming resources.
Help control the spread of rumors and be aware of fraud schemes.
1Fever may be subjective or confirmed
2Close contact is defined as—
a) being within approximately 6 feet (2 meters) of a COVID-19 case for a prolonged period of time; close contact can occur while caring for, living with, visiting, or sharing a health care waiting area or room with a COVID-19 case
b) having direct contact with infectious secretions of a COVID-19 case (e.g being coughed on)
If such contact occurs while not wearing recommended personal protective equipment or PPE (e.g gowns, gloves, NIOSH-certified disposable N95 respirator, eye protection), criteria for PUI consideration are met
See CDCs updated Interim Healthcare Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Persons Under Investigation for 2019 Novel Coronavirus.
Data to inform the definition of close contact are limited.
Considerations when assessing close contact include the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk) and the clinical symptoms of the person with COVID-19 (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk as does exposure to a severely ill patient).
Special consideration should be given to those exposed in health care settings.
A novel coronavirus is a new coronavirus that has not been previously identified.
The virus causing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), is not the same as the coronaviruses that commonly circulate among humans and cause mild illness, like the common cold.
On February 11, 2020 the World Health Organization announced an official name for the disease that is causing the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak, first identified in Wuhan China.
The new name of this disease is coronavirus disease 2019, abbreviated as COVID-19.
In COVID-19, ‘CO stands for ‘corona, ‘VI for ‘virus, and ‘D for disease.
Formerly, this disease was referred to as 2019 novel coronavirus or 2019-nCoV.
There are many types of human coronaviruses including some that commonly cause mild upper-respiratory tract illnesses.
COVID-19 is a new disease, caused by a novel (or new) coronavirus that has not previously been seen in humans.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person to person, mainly through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
Spread is more likely when people are in close contact with one another (within about 6 feet).
COVID-19 seems to be spreading easily and sustainably in the community (community spread) in many affected geographic areas.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
It is not yet known whether weather and temperature affect the spread of COVID-19.
Some other viruses, like those that cause the common cold and flu, spread more during cold weather months but that does not mean it is impossible to become sick with these viruses during other months.
There is much more to learn about the transmissibility, severity, and other features associated with COVID-19 and investigations are ongoing.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Each health department determines community spread differently based on local conditions.
For information on community spread in your area, please visit your health departments website.​
At this time, CDC has no data to suggest that this new coronavirus or other similar coronaviruses are spread by mosquitoes or ticks.
The main way that COVID-19 spreads is from person to person.
See How Coronavirus Spreads for more information.
Visit the How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others page to learn about how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19.
Wear masks in public settings when around people not living in your household and particularly where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, such as grocery stores, pharmacies, and gas stations.
Masks may slow the spread of the virus and help people who may have the virus and do not know it from transmitting it to others.
COVID-19 can be spread by people who do not have symptoms and do not know that they are infected.
Thats why its important for everyone to practice social distancing (staying at least 6 feet away from other people) and wear masks in public settings.
Masks provide an extra layer to help prevent the respiratory droplets from traveling in the air and onto other people.
The masks recommended are not surgical masks or N-95 respirators.
Those are critical supplies that must continue to be reserved for healthcare workers and other medical first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
More information about masks can be found on our masks site.
For more information, see Groups at Higher Risk for Severe Illness.
There is still a lot that is unknown about COVID-19 and how it spreads.
Coronaviruses are thought to be spread most often by respiratory droplets.
Although the virus can survive for a short period on some surfaces, it is unlikely to be spread from domestic or international mail, products or packaging.
However, it may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Learn more about safe handling of deliveries and mail.
In healthcare settings across the United States, donated blood is a lifesaving, essential part of caring for patients.
The need for donated blood is constant, and blood centers are open and in urgent need of donations.
CDC encourages people who are well to continue to donate blood if they are able, even if they are practicing social distancing because of COVID-19.
CDC is supporting blood centers by providing recommendations that will keep donors and staff safe.
Examples of these recommendations include spacing donor chairs 6 feet apart, thoroughly adhering to environmental cleaning practices, and encouraging donors to make donation appointments ahead of time.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Handwashing is one of the best ways to protect yourself and your family from getting sick.
Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing; going to the bathroom; and before eating or preparing food.
If soap and water are not readily available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces such as tables, doorknobs, light switches, countertops, handles, desks, phones, keyboards, toilets, faucets, and sinks.
If surfaces are dirty, clean them using detergent or soap and water prior to disinfection.
To disinfect, most common EPA-registered household disinfectants will work.
See CDCs recommendations for household cleaning and disinfection.
Most people who get COVID-19 will be able to recover at home.
CDC has directions for people who are recovering at home and their caregivers, including:
However, some people may need emergency medical attention.
Watch for symptoms and learn when to seek emergency medical attention.
When to Seek Emergency Medical Attention
Look for emergency warning signs* for COVID-19.
If someone is showing any of these signs, seek emergency medical care immediately
*This list is not all possible symptoms.
Please call your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 or call ahead to your local emergency facility: Notify the operator that you are seeking care for someone who has or may have COVID-19.
Based on available evidence, children do not appear to be at higher risk for COVID-19 than adults.
While some children and infants have been sick with COVID-19, adults make up most of the known cases to date.
However, a few children have developed multisystem inflammatory syndrome (MIS-C).
Currently, information about this syndrome is limited.
CDC is working with state and local health departments to learn more about MIS-C.
You can encourage your child to help stop the spread of COVID-19 by teaching them to do the same things everyone should do to stay healthy.
You can find additional information on preventing COVID-19 at How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others.
More information on Keeping Children Healthy during the COVID-19 Outbreak is available online.
No.
The symptoms of COVID-19 are similar in children and adults.
COVID-19 can look different in different people.
For many people, being sick with COVID-19 would be a little bit like having the flu.
People can get a fever, cough, or have a hard time taking deep breaths.
Most people who have gotten COVID-19 have not gotten very sick.
Only a small group of people who get it have had more serious problems.
CDC and partners are investigating cases of multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) associated with COVID-19.
Learn more about COVID-19 and multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C).
CDC recommends that everyone 2 years and older wear a mask that covers their nose and mouth in public settings when around people not living in your household, particularly where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain.
Masks should NOT be put on babies or children younger than 2 because of the danger of suffocation.
Children younger than 2 years of age are listed as an exception as well as anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Outbreaks can be stressful for adults and children.
When you talk with your child, try to stay calm, and reassure them that they are safe.
Talk to your children about COVID-19 and help them cope with stress.
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) is a condition where different body parts can become inflamed, including the heart, lungs, kidneys, brain, skin, eyes, or gastrointestinal organs.
We do not yet know what causes MIS-C.
However, we know that many children with MIS-C had the virus that causes COVID-19, or had been around someone with COVID-19.
MIS-C can be serious, even deadly, but most children who were diagnosed with this condition have gotten better with medical care.
Contact your childs doctor, nurse, or clinic right away if your child is showing symptoms of MIS-C. Seek emergency care right away if your child is showing any of these emergency warning signs of MIS-C or other concerning signs.
The key to slowing the spread of COVID-19 is to practice social distancing.
While school is out, children should not have in-person playdates with children from other households.
If children are playing outside their own homes, it is essential that they remain 6 feet from anyone who is not in their own household.
Some children with certain underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Make sure children practice everyday preventive behaviors, such as washing their hands often with soap and water.
Remember, if children meet outside of school in groups, it can put everyone at risk.
For more information, see Help Stop the Spread of COVID-19 in Children.
For more information, see Help Children Learn at Home.
Check with your school on plans to continue meal services during the school dismissal.
Many schools are keeping school facilities open to allow families to pick up meals or are providing grab-and-go meals at a central location.
For more information, see Keep Children Healthy during the COVID-19 Outbreak.
Older adults and people who have serious underlying medical conditions are at highest risk of getting sick from COVID-19.
Its not known yet whether all children with underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Although most COVID-19 cases in children are not severe, serious illness that needs to be treated at the hospital still happens.
Some data on children reported that the majority who needed hospitalization for COVID-19 had at least one underlying medical condition.
The most common underlying conditions reported among children with COVID-19 include chronic lung disease (including asthma), heart disease, and conditions that weaken the immune system.
This information suggests that children with these underlying medical conditions may be at risk for more severe illness from COVID-19.
More data are needed to learn which underlying or complex medical conditions may put children at increased risk.
CDC is monitoring new information as it becomes available and will provide updates as needed.
Learn more about caring for children with special health care needs during a disaster and people who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
In addition to following the recommendations to prevent getting sick and running essential errands, families should take extra steps recommended for persons with higher risk of severe COVID-19 illness and steps outlined for those with potential COVID-19 exposure or confirmed illness.
Helping children understand and follow recommendations, like social distancing and wearing masks, can be challenging if your child has intellectual disabilities, sensory issues, or other special healthcare needs.
Supporting children with special healthcare needs can put additional demands and stress on families, especially during emergency situations.
You have likely found ways to manage the stress and challenges unique to your familys situation.
It is important to continue your familys coping methods, including reaching out to other family members, friends, support groups, and organizations that have been helpful in the past.
See information on helping children cope and coping with stress (such as visiting parks, trails, or open spaces) and making your family stronger.
If you, or someone you care about, are feeling overwhelmed with emotions like sadness, depression, or anxiety, or feel like you want to harm yourself or others:
If your child with special healthcare needs becomes sick with symptoms of COVID-19, contact your childs healthcare provider.
If your child has new or worsening emergency warning signs, such as trouble breathing, pain or pressure in the chest, confusion or inability to wake them up, or bluish lips or face, call 911.
If you think your child may have COVID-19, notify the operator so that first responders may be appropriately prepared to protect themselves and others.
Notify your childs healthcare provider if someone else in your house becomes sick with COVID-19, so they can provide any advice specific for your child.
See additional information if someone in the home is sick with COVID-19 or suspected of having COVID-19.
If your childs healthcare provider tells you to go to the hospital for any health problem, including COVID-19
Create a household plan of action to help protect your health and the health of those you care about in the event of an outbreak of COVID-19 in your community:
Plan for potential changes at your workplace.
Talk to your employer about their emergency operations plan, including sick-leave policies and telework options.
Learn how businesses and employers can plan for and respond to COVID-19.
CDC does not encourage the production and use of homemade hand sanitizer products because of concerns over the correct use of the ingredientsexternal icon and the need to work under sterile conditions to make the product.
Local industries that are looking into producing hand sanitizer to fill in for commercial shortages can refer to the World Health Organization guidance.pdf iconexternal icon Organizations should revert to the use of commercially produced, FDA-approved product once such supplies again become available.
People with COVID-19 have reported a wide range of symptoms – from mild symptoms to severe illness.
Symptoms may appear 2-14 days after exposure to the virus.
If you have fever, cough, or other symptoms, you might have COVID-19.
Look for emergency warning signs* for COVID-19.
If someone is showing any of these signs, seek emergency medical care immediately
*This list is not all possible symptoms.
Please call your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 or call ahead to your local emergency facility: Notify the operator that you are seeking care for someone who has or may have COVID-19.
Yes.
It is possible to test positive for flu (as well as other respiratory infections) and COVID-19 at the same time.
Maybe; not everyone needs to be tested for COVID-19.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and want to get tested, call your healthcare provider first.
Most people will have mild illness and can recover at home without medical care and may not need to be tested.
CDC has guidance for who should be tested, but decisions about testing are made by state and local health departments and healthcare providers.
You can also visit your state or local health departments website to look for the latest local information on testing.
Decisions about testing are made by state and localexternal icon health departments or healthcare providers.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and are not tested, it is important to stay home.
What to do if you are sick.
COVID-19 testing differs by location.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and want to get tested, call your healthcare provider first.
You can also visit your state or localexternal icon health departments website to look for the latest local information on testing.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized viral tests that let you collect either a nasal swabexternal icon or a saliva sampleexternal icon at home.
However, you will still need to send your sample to a laboratory for analysis.
If you test positive for COVID-19, know what protective steps to take if you are sick or caring for someone.
If you test negative for COVID-19, you probably were not infected at the time your sample was collected.
However, that does not mean you will not get sick.
The test result only means that you did not have COVID-19 at the time of testing.
You might test negative if the sample was collected early in your infection and test positive later during your illness.
You could also be exposed to COVID-19 after the test and get infected then.
This means you could still spread the virus.
If you develop symptoms later, you might need another test to determine if you are infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.
For more information about viral tests, please visit Test for Current Infection.
Antibody tests for COVID-19 are available through healthcare providers and laboratories.
Check with your healthcare provider to see if they offer antibody tests and whether you should get one.
A positive test result shows you might have antibodies from an infection with the virus that causes COVID-19.
However, there is a chance a positive result means that you have antibodies from an infection with a virus from the same family of viruses (called coronaviruses), such as the one that causes the common cold.
Having antibodies to the virus that causes COVID-19 might provide protection from getting infected with the virus again.
If it does, we do not know how much protection the antibodies might provide or how long this protection might last.
You should continue to protect yourself and others since you could get infected with the virus again.
If you test negative, you might not have ever had COVID-19.
Talk with your healthcare provider about your test result and the type of test you took to understand what your result means.
Regardless of whether you test positive or negative, the results do not confirm whether or not you are able to spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
Until we know more, continue to take steps to protect yourself and others.
If you want more information about antibody tests, see Test for Past Infection.
Yes, it is possible.
You may test negative if the sample was collected early in your infection and test positive later during this illness.
You could also be exposed to COVID-19 after the test and get infected then.
Even if you test negative, you still should take steps to protect yourself and others.
See Testing for Current Infection for more information.
COVID-19 is a new disease and there is limited information regarding risk factors for severe disease.
Based on currently available information and clinical expertise, older adults and people with underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
If you are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19, you should:
Most people with disabilities are not inherently at higher risk for becoming infected with or having severe illness from COVID-19.
Some people with physical limitations or other disabilities might be at a higher risk of infection because of their underlying medical condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Contact tracing has been used for decades by state and local health departments to slow or stop the spread of infectious diseases.
Contact tracing slows the spread of COVID-19 by
During contact tracing, the health department staff will not ask you for
Discussions with health department staff are confidential.
This means that your personal and medical information will be kept private and only shared with those who may need to know, like your health care provider.
If you have been diagnosed with COVID-19, your name will not be shared with those you came in contact with.
The health department will only notify people you were in close contact with (within 6 feet for more than 15 minutes) that they might have been exposed to COVID-19.
Each state and jurisdiction use their own method for collecting and protecting health information.
To learn more, contact your state or local health department.
You may also be interested in: If I participate contact tracing for COVID-19 using a digital tool, is my personal health information secure?
For COVID-19, a close contact is anyone who was within 6 feet of an infected person for at least 15 minutes.
An infected person can spread COVID-19 starting 48 hours (or 2 days) before the person had any symptoms or tested positive for COVID-19.
Yes, you are still considered a close contact even if you were wearing a mask while you were around someone with COVID-19.
Masks are meant to protect other people in case you are infected, and not to protect you from becoming infected.
If you have been around someone who is sick with COVID-19, local authorities, the health department, or your doctor may recommend that you get tested for COVID-19.
The health department may be able to provide resources for testing in your area.
If you are diagnosed with COVID-19, someone from the health department may call you to check on your health, discuss who you have been around, and ask where you spent time while you may have been able to spread COVID-19 to others.
You will also be asked to continue to stay at home and self-isolate, away from others.
Watch for or monitor your symptoms of COVID-19.
If your symptoms worsen or become severe, you should seek medical care.
If you were around someone who has been diagnosed with COVID-19, someone from the health department may call you to let you know that you may have been exposed to COVID-19.
Stay home away from others for 14 days (self-quarantine) after your last contact with that person.
Health department staff will help identify the dates for your self-quarantine.
Health department staff can also provide resources for COVID-19 testing in your area.
Monitor your health and watch for symptoms of COVID-19.
Remember, symptoms may appear 2-14 days after you were exposed to COVID-19.
Tell the health department if you develop any symptoms.
Tell people you were around recently if you become ill, so they can monitor their health.
If your symptoms worsen or become severe, seek medical care.
Severe symptoms include trouble breathing, persistent pain or pressure in the chest, new confusion, inability to wake or stay awake, or bluish lips or face.
The health department staff will not ask you for
Yes.
You should still self-quarantine for 14 days since your last exposure.
It can take up to 14 days after exposure to the virus for a person to develop COVID-19 symptoms.
A negative result before end of the 14-day quarantine period does not rule out possible infection.
By self-quarantining for 14 days, you lower the chance of possibly exposing others to COVID-19.
People with COVID-19 can still spread the virus even if they dont have any symptoms.
If you were around someone who had COVID-19, it is critical that you stay home and away from others for 14 days from the last day that you were around that person.
Staying home and away from others at all times helps your health department in the fight against COVID-19 and helps protect you, your family, and your community.
If you have been around someone who was identified as a close contact to a person with COVID-19, closely monitor yourself for any symptoms of COVID-19.
You do not need to self-quarantine unless you develop symptoms or if the person identified as a close contact develops COVID-19.
No, there will not be a national app for contact tracing.
There are many options available now, and it is up to each state and individual to decide which tools best fit their needs.
Yes, if you agree to participate in contact tracing for COVID-19 with the health department, your information is secure.
Discussions with health department staff are confidential.
This means that your personal and medical information will be kept private and only shared with those who may need to know, like your health care provider.
Your name will not be shared with those you came in contact with.
If you have been diagnosed with COVID-19, the health department will only notify people you were in close contact with (within 6 feet for more than 15 minutes) that they might have been exposed to COVID-19.
Health departments may use case management tools to help make the contact tracing process more efficient.
If you choose to provide information through one of these tools, your information is secure and stored with the health department.
These tools also help health departments quickly receive and analyze information about COVID-19.
Case management tools are under the same laws and regulations for all sensitive health information use (e.g.
HIPPA).
You must provide consent for the health department to collect information using a case management tool.
Just like traditional contact tracing, digital tools will not collect information regarding money, Social Security numbers, bank account information, salary information, or credit card numbers.
Exposure notification tools may be an app that you can download on your personal cell phone.
If you choose to download an exposure notification app for COVID-19, your information is secure.
Exposure notification apps are developed in collaboration with or endorsed by health departments.
These apps undergo rigorous testing to determine their trustworthiness, security, and ability to protect peoples privacy.
Until you give consent to share information with your local health department, any information you have entered into the app is stored only on your personal phone.
Your information is stored only on your own phone and is not sent to the health department or any other third party.
The app and your information can be deleted any time.
When you consent to share your information with the local health department, your information is secure.
No, you are not required to download an app to give information for contact tracing for COVID-19.
Health departments commonly use case management tools to make the contact tracing process more efficient.
These types of tools are not downloaded on personal cell phones.
If you choose to give information to your local or state health department for contact tracing for COVID-19, you do not need to download an app on your cell phone.
The health department staff may call you to
It is up to you to decide if you download an exposure notification app for COVID-19.
There is currently no known risk associated with being in the same room at a funeral or visitation service with the body of someone who died of COVID-19.
See How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others to learn how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19, if you decide to attend a funeral or visitation.
COVID-19 is a new disease and we are still learning how it spreads.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
This type of spread is not a concern after death.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
This is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
People should consider not touching the body of someone who has died of COVID-19.
Older people and people of all ages with severe underlying health conditions are at higher risk of severe illness from COVID-19.
There may be less of a chance of the virus spreading from certain types of touching, such as holding the hand or hugging after the body has been prepared for viewing.
Other activities, such as kissing, washing, and shrouding should be avoided before, during, and after the body has been prepared, if possible.
If washing the body or shrouding are important religious or cultural practices, families are encouraged to work with their communitys cultural and religious leaders and funeral home staff on how to reduce their exposure as much as possible.
At a minimum, people conducting these activities should wear disposable gloves.
If splashing of fluids is expected, additional personal protective equipment (PPE) may be required (such as disposable gown, face shield, or goggles and N-95 respirator).
If desired, you may retrieve the belongings of a loved one who has died of COVID-19 outside their home (for example, in a hospital setting).
Depending on local rules and regulations, family members may retrieve these belongings at the funeral home or the healthcare facility.
You should use gloves and practice good hand hygiene when handling your loved ones belongings.
Depending on the type of belongings, such as electronics, you should also follow the household item-specific cleaning and disinfection guidelines when handling these items.
When a US citizen dies outside the United States, the deceased persons next of kin or legal representative should notify US consular officials at the Department of State.
Consular personnel are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, to provide assistance to US citizens for overseas emergencies.
If a family member, domestic partner, or legal representative is in a different country from the deceased person, he or she should call the Department of States Office of Overseas Citizens Services in Washington, DC, from 8 am to 5 pm Eastern time, Monday through Friday, at 888-407-4747 (toll-free) or 202-501-4444.
For emergency assistance after working hours or on weekends and holidays, call the Department of State switchboard at 202-647-4000 and ask to speak with the Overseas Citizens Services duty officer.
In addition, the US embassyexternal iconexternal iconexternal icon closest to or in the country where the US citizen died can provide assistance.
CDC does not require an autopsy before the remains of a person who died overseas are returned to the United States.
Depending on the circumstances surrounding the death, some countries may require an autopsy.
Sources of support to the family include the local consulate or embassy, travel insurance provider, tour operator, faith-based and aid organizations, and the deceaseds employer.
There likely will need to be an official identification of the body and official documents issued by the consular office.
CDC requirements for importing human remains depend upon if the body has been embalmed, cremated, or if the person died from a quarantinable communicable disease.
At this time, COVID-19 is a quarantinable communicable disease in the United States and the remains must meet the standards for importation found in 42 Code of Federal Regulations Part 71.55 and may be cleared, released, and authorized for entry into the United States only under the following conditions:
Please see CDCs guidance for additional information.
Cleaning with soap and water removes germs, dirt, and impurities from surfaces.
It lowers the risk of spreading infection.
Disinfecting kills germs on surfaces.
By killing germs on a surface after cleaning, it can further lower the risk of spreading infection.
The risk of transmitting or spreading SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, during vacuuming is unknown.
In order to reduce the need for cleaning, disinfection, and vacuuming, consider removing area rugs completely, if possible.
At this time, there are no reported cases of COVID-19 associated with vacuuming.
If vacuuming is necessary or required in a school, business, or community facility that was used by a person with suspected or confirmed COVID-19, first follow the CDC recommendations for Cleaning and Disinfection for Community Facilities that apply, which includes a wait time of 24 hours, or as long as practical.
After cleaning and disinfection, the following recommendations may help reduce the risk to workers and other individuals when vacuuming:
Routine cleaning is the everyday cleaning practices that businesses and communities normally use to maintain a healthy environment.
Surfaces frequently touched by multiple people, such as door handles, bathroom surfaces, and handrails, should be cleaned with soap and water or another detergent at least daily when facilities are in use.
More frequent cleaning and disinfection may be required based on level of use.
For example, certain surfaces and objects in public spaces, such as shopping carts and point of sale keypads, should be cleaned and disinfected before each use.
Cleaning removes dirt and impurities, including germs, from surfaces.
Cleaning alone does not kill germs, but it reduces the number of germs on a surface.
Cleaning does not kill germs, but by removing them, it lowers their numbers and the risk of spreading infection.
If a surface may have gotten the virus on it from a person with or suspected to have COVID-19, the surface should be cleaned and disinfected.
Disinfecting kills germs on surfaces.
Regular cleaning staff can clean and disinfect community spaces.
Cleaning staff should be trained on appropriate use of cleaning and disinfection chemicals and provided with the personal protective equipment (PPE) required for the chemicals used.
Companies do not necessarily need to close after a person with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 has been in a company facility.
The area(s) used or visited by the ill person should be closed for 24 hours or as long as possible.
Open outside doors and windows as much as possible ensuring that doing so does not pose a safety risk to children using the facility (i.e.
make sure that children are not able to enter the closed off area through any windows or doors).
and use ventilating fans to increase air circulation in the area.
Once the area has been appropriately disinfected, it can be opened for use.
Workers without close contact with the person with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 can return to work immediately after disinfection is completed.
The efficacy of these disinfection methods against the virus that causes COVID-19 is not known.
EPA only recommends use of the surface disinfectants identified on List Nexternal icon against the virus that causes COVID-19.
EPA does not routinely review the safety or efficacy of pesticidal devices, such as UV lights, LED lights, or ultrasonic devices.
Therefore, EPA cannot confirm whether, or under what circumstances, such products might be effective against the spread of COVID-19.
Outdoor areas generally require normal routine cleaning and do not require disinfection.
Spraying disinfectant on outdoor playgrounds is not an efficient use of disinfectant supplies and has not been proven to reduce the risk of COVID-19 to the public.
You should maintain existing cleaning and hygiene practices for outdoor areas.
If practical, high touch surfaces made of plastic or metal, such as grab bars and railings, should be cleaned routinely.
Cleaning and disinfection of wooden surfaces (e.g play structures, benches, tables) or groundcovers (e.g mulch, sand) is not recommended.
CDC does not recommend the use of sanitizing tunnels.
There is no evidence that they are effective in reducing the spread of COVID-19.
Chemicals used in sanitizing tunnels could cause skin, eye, or respiratory irritation or damage.
CDC does not recommend disinfection of sidewalks or roads.
Spraying disinfectant on sidewalks and roads is not an efficient use of disinfectant supplies and has not been proven to reduce the risk of COVID-19 to the public.
The risk of spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 from these surfaces is very low and disinfection is not effective on these surfaces.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
See If You Have Pets for more information about pets and COVID-19.
However, since animals can spread other diseases to people, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, such as washing your hands and maintaining good hygiene.
For more information on the many benefits of pet ownership, as well as staying safe and healthy around animals including pets, livestock, and wildlife, visit CDCs Healthy Pets, Healthy People website.
Although we know certain bacteria and fungi can be carried on fur and hair, there is no evidence that viruses, including the virus that causes COVID-19, can spread to people from the skin, fur, or hair of pets.
However, because animals can sometimes carry other germs that can make people sick, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, including washing hands before and after interacting with them.
Dog parks provide socialization and exercise for dogs, which is an important part of their wellbeing.
Because there is a risk that people with COVID-19 could spread it to animals, CDC recommends that you do not let pets interact with people outside of your household, especially in places with community spread of COVID-19.
Therefore, you should consider avoiding dog parks or other places where large numbers of people and dogs gather.
Some areas are allowing dog parks to open.
If you choose to go to a dog park, follow local guidelines.
There are ways to reduce the risk of you or your dog getting infected with COVID-19 if you go to a dog park.
See more information on pets and COVID-19 and recommendations for how to help keep your pet safe.
Until we know more about how this virus affects animals, CDC encourages pet owners to treat pets as you would other human family members to protect them from possible infection.
This means limiting contact between your pets and people outside your household as much as possible and avoiding places where large numbers of people gather.
Some areas are allowing groomers and boarding facilities such as dog daycares to open.
If you must take your pet to a groomer or boarding facility, follow any protocols put into place at the facility, such as wearing a mask and maintaining at least 6 feet of space between yourself and others if possible.
Limit pet items brought from home to the groomer or boarding facility, and disinfect any objects that are taken into a facility and returned home (such as leashes, bowls, and toys).
Use an EPA-registered disinfectantexternal icon to clean items and rinse thoroughly with clean water afterwards.
Do not wipe or bathe your pet with chemical disinfectants, alcohol, hydrogen peroxide, or other products, such as hand sanitizer, counter-cleaning wipes, or other industrial or surface cleaners.
If you have questions about appropriate products for bathing or cleaning your pet, talk to your veterinarian.
Do not put masks on pets, and do not take a sick pet to a groomer or boarding facility.
Signs of sickness in dogs may include fever, coughing, difficulty breathing or shortness of breath, lethargy, sneezing, discharge from the nose or eyes, vomiting, or diarrhea.
If you think your pet is sick, call your veterinarian.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
See more information on pets and COVID-19 and recommendations for how to help keep your pet safe.
Most pets that have gotten sick from the virus that causes COVID-19 were infected after close contact with a person with COVID-19.
Talk to your veterinarian about any health concerns you have about your pets.
If your pet gets sick after contact with a person with COVID-19, call your veterinarian and let them know the pet was around a person with COVID-19.
If you are sick with COVID-19, do not take your pet to the veterinary clinic yourself.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
Routine testing of animals for COVID-19 is not recommended at this time.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
However, it appears that the virus that causes COVID-19 can spread from people to animals after close contact with people with COVID-19.
Until we learn more about how this virus affects animals, use similar precautions for pets and other animals in your facility as you would for other people in your facility.
This will help protect both people and pets in your facility from COVID-19.
Talk to a veterinarian if a pet in your facility gets sick or if you have any concerns about the health of any pets in the facility.
If you think a pet in the facility was exposed to or is showing signs consistent with COVID-19, contact your state health official to discuss guidance on testing pets or other animals for the virus that causes COVID-19.
People who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 should avoid providing care for sick pets, if possible.
For more information, visit CDCs If You Have Pets webpage.
CDC does not have any evidence to suggest that imported animals or animal products pose a risk for spreading COVID-19 in the United States.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
CDC, the U. S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) play distinct but complementary roles in regulating the importation of live animals and animal products into the United States.
Please refer to CDCs requirements for bringing a dog to the United States.
The current requirements for rabies vaccination apply to dogs imported from high-risk countries for rabies.
Imported animals will need to meet CDC and USDAsexternal iconexternal icon requirements for entering the United States.
At this time, there is no evidence that companion animals, including pets and service animals, can spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
As with any animal introduced to a new environment, animals recently imported should be observed daily for signs of illness.
If an animal becomes ill, the animal should be examined by a veterinarian.
Call your local veterinary clinic before bringing the animal into the clinic and let them know that the animal was recently imported from another country.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
Currently, there is no evidence to suggest the virus that causes COVID-19 is circulating in free-living wildlife in the United States, or that wildlife might be a source of infection for people in the United States.
If a wild animal were to become infected with the virus, we dont know whether the infection could then spread among wildlife or if it could spread to other animals, including pets.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals, including wildlife, could be affected by COVID-19.
Because wildlife can carry other diseases, even without looking sick, it is always important to enjoy wildlife from a distance.
Take steps to prevent getting sick from wildlife in the United States:
See COVID-19 and Animals for more information.
Other coronaviruses have been found in North American bats in the past, but there is currently no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 is present in any free-living wildlife in the United States, including bats.
In general, coronaviruses do not cause illness or death in bats, but we dont yet know if this new coronavirus would make North American species of bats sick.
Bats are an important part of natural ecosystems, and their populations are already declining in the United States.
Bat populations could be further threatened by the disease itself or by harm inflicted on bats resulting from a misconception that bats are spreading COVID-19.
However, there is no evidence that bats in the United States are a source of the virus that causes COVID-19 for people.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how bats could be affected by COVID-19.
Currently, there is no evidence that you can get infected with the virus that causes COVID-19 by eating food, including wild hunted game meat.
However, hunters can get infected with other diseases when processing or eating game.
Hunters should always practice good hygiene when processing animals by following these food safety recommendations:
You should follow your state and/or local jurisdictional guidance regarding continuing operations at your facility.
There have not been any reports of horses testing positive for the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
COVID-19 is primarily spread from person to person, so steps should be taken to reduce the risks for people visiting your facility.
For more information, see Guidance on Preparing Workplaces for COVID-19pdf iconexternal icon and Interim Guidance for Businesses and Employers to Plan and Respond to Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Community mitigation is especially important before a vaccine or drug becomes widely available.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
Individual people, communities, schools, businesses, and healthcare organizations have a role to play in community mitigation.
Policies*, which include limits on large gatherings, restrictions on businesses, and school closures are often needed to fully put in place community mitigation strategies.
Each community is unique.
Because some actions can be very disruptive to daily life, mitigation activities will be different depending on how much disease has spread within the community, what the community population is like, and the ability to take these actions at the local level.
To identify appropriate activities, all parts of a community that might be affected need to be considered, including populations most vulnerable to severe illness, and those who might be more affected socially or economically.
When selecting mitigation activities, states and communities need to consider the spread of disease locally, characteristics of the people who live in the community (for example, age groups, languages spoken, overall health status), and the kind of public health resources and healthcare systems (like hospitals) that are available in the community.
State and local officials may need to adjust community mitigation activities and immediately take steps to scale them up or down depending on the changing local situation.
Putting mitigation into practice is based on
*CDC cannot address the policies of any business or organization.
CDC shares recommendations based on the best available science to help people make decisions that improve their health and safety.
In all cases, follow the guidance of your healthcare provider and local health department.
Local decisions depend on local circumstances.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
Currently there is no evidence that people can get COVID-19 by eating or handling food.
It may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object, such as a food package or dining ware that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
There is also no current evidence that people can get COVID-19 by drinking water.
The COVID-19 virus has not been detected in drinking water.
Conventional water treatment methods that use filtration and disinfection, such as those in most municipal drinking water systems, should remove or kill the virus that causes COVID-19.​ Learn more about food and COVID-19.
The virus that causes COVID-19 has not been detected in treated drinking water.
Water treatment plants use filters and disinfectants to remove or kill germs, like the virus that causes COVID-19.
The Environmental Protection Agency regulates water treatment plants to ensure that treated water is safe to drink.
Currently, there is no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 can be spread to people by drinking treated water.
COVID-19 is spread mainly through close contact from person-to-person.
You can continue to use and drink water from your tap as usual.
The virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in the feces of some patients diagnosed with COVID-19.
However, it is unclear whether the virus found in feces may be capable of causing COVID-19.
There has not been any confirmed report of the virus spreading from feces to a person.
Scientists also do not know how much risk there is that the virus could be spread from the feces of an infected person to another person.
However, they think this risk is low based on data from previous outbreaks of diseases caused by related coronaviruses, such as severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS).
Recently, ribonucleic acid (RNA) from the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater, and no information to date that anyone has become sick with COVID-19 because of exposure to wastewater.
At this time, the risk of transmission of the virus that causes COVID-19 through properly designed and maintained sewerage systems is thought to be low.
Recently, ribonucleic acid (RNA) from the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater, and no information to date that anyone has become sick with COVID-19 because of exposure to wastewater.
Standard practices associated with wastewater treatment plant operations should be sufficient to protect wastewater workers from the virus that causes COVID-19.
These standard practices can include engineering and administrative controls, hygiene precautions, specific safe work practices, and personal protective equipment (PPE) normally required when handling untreated wastewater.
No additional COVID-19–specific protections are recommended for workers involved in wastewater management, including those at wastewater treatment facilities.
See Information for Wastewater and Sanitation System Workers on COVID-19 for additional information.
In most cases, it is safe to wash your hands with soap and tap water during a Boil Water Advisory.
Follow the guidance from your local public health officials.
If soap and water are not available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in pools, hot tubs, or water playgrounds.
Plus, proper operation of public pools, hot tubs, and water playgrounds (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) and disinfection of the water (with chlorine or bromine) should inactivate the virus.
The virus mainly spreads when respiratory droplets from infected people land in the mouths or noses of others or possibly when inhaled into the lungs by others.
If a public pool, hot tub, or water playground is open, it is important for all visitors and staff to take steps to slow the spread of the virus:
See Considerations for Public Pools, Hot Tubs, and Water Playgrounds for more information.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in pools, including saltwater pools.
Plus, proper operation of public pools (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) and disinfection of the water (with chlorine or bromine) should inactivate the virus.
Saltwater pools are chlorinated pools.
In traditional pools, chlorine products (such as granules or liquid bleach) are added to the water to disinfect it.
In saltwater pools, table salt (made up of sodium and chloride) is added to the water, and an electrical current is then run through the water with dissolved salt.
This creates the same disinfecting form of chlorine that is created when chlorine products are added to the water in traditional pools.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in lakes, oceans, rivers, or other natural bodies of water.
The virus mainly spreads when respiratory droplets from infected people land in the mouths or noses of others or possibly when inhaled into the lungs by others.
If a public beach or other swim area in a natural body of water is open, it is important for all visitors and staff to take steps to slow the spread of the virus:
See Considerations for Public Beaches for more information.
RNAexternal icon of the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater, which can come from combined sewer overflowsexternal icon (rainwater runoff, domestic sewage, and industrial wastewater) and other sourcesexternal icon (such as, leaking septic tanks or animal waste from farms nearby) and enter swim areas.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater.
Plus, CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus being spread by swallowing or coming in contact with water contaminated by feces (poop) from an infected person.
At lakes, oceans, and rivers with routine water quality monitoring programs, staff look for changes in fecal (poop) contamination of the water.
Water quality advisories and beach closures alert the public to avoid getting in or on the water because of increased fecal contamination.
Learn more about healthy swimming in natural bodies of water and access water quality information by state.
No, do NOT wear a cloth mask in the water.
It can be difficult to breathe through a cloth mask when it is wet.
Plus, wet cloth masks dont slow the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19 as well as dry cloth masks.
All of this means it is particularly important to stay at least 6 feet apart in the water from people you dont live with.
In case cloth masks do get wet by mistake, bring a second (or extra) cloth mask for everyone heading out to the public pool or beach.
CDC does not yet have evidence on the effectiveness of different types of cloth materials.
Wearing cloth masks can help prevent people infected with the virus that causes COVID-19 from spreading the virus.
Make sure your cloth mask:
Cloth masks should NOT be worn by children less than 2 years old or anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Learn more about how to wear, take off, and wash your cloth masks.
The design of the public pool, hot tub, or water playground and surrounding deck and if visitors live together or not will affect how many people can stay at least 6 feet apart from those they dont live with.
CDC recommends operators of public pools, hot tubs, and water playgrounds:
Operators might want to limit the number of people in and around the water so if the water needs to be evacuated (because of lightning or other health or safety threat) social distancing can be maintained on the deck.
Otherwise, if the water is evacuated and social distancing cannot be maintained on the deck, close the deck to visitors.
There is no standard formula to determine how many people can maintain social distancing in the water and on the surrounding deck.
See Considerations for Public Pools, Hot Tubs, and Water Playgrounds for more information.
No.
Only List N disinfectants approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agencyexternal icon should be used to disinfect surfaces (such as handrails and in bathrooms) and shared objects (such as kickboards and pool noodles).
The list includes hundreds of disinfectants.
Operators of public pools, hot tubs, or water playgrounds (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) should consult with the design company or engineer to determine which disinfectants are best suited for surfaces and with manufacturers to determine which disinfectants are best suited for shared objects.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectants.
We dont know yet.
Early scientific data suggest that SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, can be inactivated by the suns UV light.
However, the ability of the suns UV light to inactivate the virus on surfaces (such as handrails and in bathrooms) and shared objects (such as kickboards and pool noodles) needs more research.
Factors — such as cloudiness, latitude (distance from equator), time of day, and amount of time exposed to the suns UV light — will determine how effectively the virus is inactivated.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectantsexternal icon.
The more frequently a surface is touched by multiple people, the more frequently it should be cleaned and then disinfected with a List N disinfectant approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agencyexternal icon.
Frequently touched surfaces should be cleaned and disinfected at least daily.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectants.
No.
RNAexternal icon of the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in feces (poop).
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in feces.
Plus, CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus being spread by swallowing or coming in contact with water contaminated by feces from an infected person.
As a result, CDC has not changed its fecal incident response recommendations.
Remember, do NOT vacuum feces out of the water.
Not when lifeguards are actively lifeguarding.
Lifeguards actively lifeguarding should not be doing other tasks that could distract them.
Drowning deaths have resulted, at least in part, from lifeguards being distracted.
Drowning can occur quickly and quietly.
Learn and take steps to prevent drowning.
Lifeguard trainers can consider the following steps to slow the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19:
CDC has more COVID-19–related considerations for public pools and public beaches and non-COVID-19–related healthy and safe swimming resources.
Help control the spread of rumors and be aware of fraud schemes.
1Fever may be subjective or confirmed
2Close contact is defined as—
a) being within approximately 6 feet (2 meters) of a COVID-19 case for a prolonged period of time; close contact can occur while caring for, living with, visiting, or sharing a health care waiting area or room with a COVID-19 case
b) having direct contact with infectious secretions of a COVID-19 case (e.g being coughed on)
If such contact occurs while not wearing recommended personal protective equipment or PPE (e.g gowns, gloves, NIOSH-certified disposable N95 respirator, eye protection), criteria for PUI consideration are met
See CDCs updated Interim Healthcare Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Persons Under Investigation for 2019 Novel Coronavirus.
Data to inform the definition of close contact are limited.
Considerations when assessing close contact include the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk) and the clinical symptoms of the person with COVID-19 (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk as does exposure to a severely ill patient).
Special consideration should be given to those exposed in health care settings.
A novel coronavirus is a new coronavirus that has not been previously identified.
The virus causing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), is not the same as the coronaviruses that commonly circulate among humans and cause mild illness, like the common cold.
On February 11, 2020 the World Health Organization announced an official name for the disease that is causing the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak, first identified in Wuhan China.
The new name of this disease is coronavirus disease 2019, abbreviated as COVID-19.
In COVID-19, ‘CO stands for ‘corona, ‘VI for ‘virus, and ‘D for disease.
Formerly, this disease was referred to as 2019 novel coronavirus or 2019-nCoV.
There are many types of human coronaviruses including some that commonly cause mild upper-respiratory tract illnesses.
COVID-19 is a new disease, caused by a novel (or new) coronavirus that has not previously been seen in humans.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person to person, mainly through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
Spread is more likely when people are in close contact with one another (within about 6 feet).
COVID-19 seems to be spreading easily and sustainably in the community (community spread) in many affected geographic areas.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
It is not yet known whether weather and temperature affect the spread of COVID-19.
Some other viruses, like those that cause the common cold and flu, spread more during cold weather months but that does not mean it is impossible to become sick with these viruses during other months.
There is much more to learn about the transmissibility, severity, and other features associated with COVID-19 and investigations are ongoing.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Each health department determines community spread differently based on local conditions.
For information on community spread in your area, please visit your health departments website.​
At this time, CDC has no data to suggest that this new coronavirus or other similar coronaviruses are spread by mosquitoes or ticks.
The main way that COVID-19 spreads is from person to person.
See How Coronavirus Spreads for more information.
Visit the How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others page to learn about how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19.
Wear masks in public settings when around people not living in your household and particularly where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, such as grocery stores, pharmacies, and gas stations.
Masks may slow the spread of the virus and help people who may have the virus and do not know it from transmitting it to others.
COVID-19 can be spread by people who do not have symptoms and do not know that they are infected.
Thats why its important for everyone to practice social distancing (staying at least 6 feet away from other people) and wear masks in public settings.
Masks provide an extra layer to help prevent the respiratory droplets from traveling in the air and onto other people.
The masks recommended are not surgical masks or N-95 respirators.
Those are critical supplies that must continue to be reserved for healthcare workers and other medical first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
More information about masks can be found on our masks site.
For more information, see Groups at Higher Risk for Severe Illness.
There is still a lot that is unknown about COVID-19 and how it spreads.
Coronaviruses are thought to be spread most often by respiratory droplets.
Although the virus can survive for a short period on some surfaces, it is unlikely to be spread from domestic or international mail, products or packaging.
However, it may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Learn more about safe handling of deliveries and mail.
In healthcare settings across the United States, donated blood is a lifesaving, essential part of caring for patients.
The need for donated blood is constant, and blood centers are open and in urgent need of donations.
CDC encourages people who are well to continue to donate blood if they are able, even if they are practicing social distancing because of COVID-19.
CDC is supporting blood centers by providing recommendations that will keep donors and staff safe.
Examples of these recommendations include spacing donor chairs 6 feet apart, thoroughly adhering to environmental cleaning practices, and encouraging donors to make donation appointments ahead of time.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Handwashing is one of the best ways to protect yourself and your family from getting sick.
Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing; going to the bathroom; and before eating or preparing food.
If soap and water are not readily available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces such as tables, doorknobs, light switches, countertops, handles, desks, phones, keyboards, toilets, faucets, and sinks.
If surfaces are dirty, clean them using detergent or soap and water prior to disinfection.
To disinfect, most common EPA-registered household disinfectants will work.
See CDCs recommendations for household cleaning and disinfection.
Most people who get COVID-19 will be able to recover at home.
CDC has directions for people who are recovering at home and their caregivers, including:
However, some people may need emergency medical attention.
Watch for symptoms and learn when to seek emergency medical attention.
When to Seek Emergency Medical Attention
Look for emergency warning signs* for COVID-19.
If someone is showing any of these signs, seek emergency medical care immediately
*This list is not all possible symptoms.
Please call your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 or call ahead to your local emergency facility: Notify the operator that you are seeking care for someone who has or may have COVID-19.
Based on available evidence, children do not appear to be at higher risk for COVID-19 than adults.
While some children and infants have been sick with COVID-19, adults make up most of the known cases to date.
However, a few children have developed multisystem inflammatory syndrome (MIS-C).
Currently, information about this syndrome is limited.
CDC is working with state and local health departments to learn more about MIS-C.
You can encourage your child to help stop the spread of COVID-19 by teaching them to do the same things everyone should do to stay healthy.
You can find additional information on preventing COVID-19 at How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others.
More information on Keeping Children Healthy during the COVID-19 Outbreak is available online.
No.
The symptoms of COVID-19 are similar in children and adults.
COVID-19 can look different in different people.
For many people, being sick with COVID-19 would be a little bit like having the flu.
People can get a fever, cough, or have a hard time taking deep breaths.
Most people who have gotten COVID-19 have not gotten very sick.
Only a small group of people who get it have had more serious problems.
CDC and partners are investigating cases of multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) associated with COVID-19.
Learn more about COVID-19 and multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C).
CDC recommends that everyone 2 years and older wear a mask that covers their nose and mouth in public settings when around people not living in your household, particularly where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain.
Masks should NOT be put on babies or children younger than 2 because of the danger of suffocation.
Children younger than 2 years of age are listed as an exception as well as anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Outbreaks can be stressful for adults and children.
When you talk with your child, try to stay calm, and reassure them that they are safe.
Talk to your children about COVID-19 and help them cope with stress.
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) is a condition where different body parts can become inflamed, including the heart, lungs, kidneys, brain, skin, eyes, or gastrointestinal organs.
We do not yet know what causes MIS-C.
However, we know that many children with MIS-C had the virus that causes COVID-19, or had been around someone with COVID-19.
MIS-C can be serious, even deadly, but most children who were diagnosed with this condition have gotten better with medical care.
Contact your childs doctor, nurse, or clinic right away if your child is showing symptoms of MIS-C. Seek emergency care right away if your child is showing any of these emergency warning signs of MIS-C or other concerning signs.
The key to slowing the spread of COVID-19 is to practice social distancing.
While school is out, children should not have in-person playdates with children from other households.
If children are playing outside their own homes, it is essential that they remain 6 feet from anyone who is not in their own household.
Some children with certain underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Make sure children practice everyday preventive behaviors, such as washing their hands often with soap and water.
Remember, if children meet outside of school in groups, it can put everyone at risk.
For more information, see Help Stop the Spread of COVID-19 in Children.
For more information, see Help Children Learn at Home.
Check with your school on plans to continue meal services during the school dismissal.
Many schools are keeping school facilities open to allow families to pick up meals or are providing grab-and-go meals at a central location.
For more information, see Keep Children Healthy during the COVID-19 Outbreak.
Older adults and people who have serious underlying medical conditions are at highest risk of getting sick from COVID-19.
Its not known yet whether all children with underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Although most COVID-19 cases in children are not severe, serious illness that needs to be treated at the hospital still happens.
Some data on children reported that the majority who needed hospitalization for COVID-19 had at least one underlying medical condition.
The most common underlying conditions reported among children with COVID-19 include chronic lung disease (including asthma), heart disease, and conditions that weaken the immune system.
This information suggests that children with these underlying medical conditions may be at risk for more severe illness from COVID-19.
More data are needed to learn which underlying or complex medical conditions may put children at increased risk.
CDC is monitoring new information as it becomes available and will provide updates as needed.
Learn more about caring for children with special health care needs during a disaster and people who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
In addition to following the recommendations to prevent getting sick and running essential errands, families should take extra steps recommended for persons with higher risk of severe COVID-19 illness and steps outlined for those with potential COVID-19 exposure or confirmed illness.
Helping children understand and follow recommendations, like social distancing and wearing masks, can be challenging if your child has intellectual disabilities, sensory issues, or other special healthcare needs.
Supporting children with special healthcare needs can put additional demands and stress on families, especially during emergency situations.
You have likely found ways to manage the stress and challenges unique to your familys situation.
It is important to continue your familys coping methods, including reaching out to other family members, friends, support groups, and organizations that have been helpful in the past.
See information on helping children cope and coping with stress (such as visiting parks, trails, or open spaces) and making your family stronger.
If you, or someone you care about, are feeling overwhelmed with emotions like sadness, depression, or anxiety, or feel like you want to harm yourself or others:
If your child with special healthcare needs becomes sick with symptoms of COVID-19, contact your childs healthcare provider.
If your child has new or worsening emergency warning signs, such as trouble breathing, pain or pressure in the chest, confusion or inability to wake them up, or bluish lips or face, call 911.
If you think your child may have COVID-19, notify the operator so that first responders may be appropriately prepared to protect themselves and others.
Notify your childs healthcare provider if someone else in your house becomes sick with COVID-19, so they can provide any advice specific for your child.
See additional information if someone in the home is sick with COVID-19 or suspected of having COVID-19.
If your childs healthcare provider tells you to go to the hospital for any health problem, including COVID-19
Create a household plan of action to help protect your health and the health of those you care about in the event of an outbreak of COVID-19 in your community:
Plan for potential changes at your workplace.
Talk to your employer about their emergency operations plan, including sick-leave policies and telework options.
Learn how businesses and employers can plan for and respond to COVID-19.
CDC does not encourage the production and use of homemade hand sanitizer products because of concerns over the correct use of the ingredientsexternal icon and the need to work under sterile conditions to make the product.
Local industries that are looking into producing hand sanitizer to fill in for commercial shortages can refer to the World Health Organization guidance.pdf iconexternal icon Organizations should revert to the use of commercially produced, FDA-approved product once such supplies again become available.
People with COVID-19 have reported a wide range of symptoms – from mild symptoms to severe illness.
Symptoms may appear 2-14 days after exposure to the virus.
If you have fever, cough, or other symptoms, you might have COVID-19.
Look for emergency warning signs* for COVID-19.
If someone is showing any of these signs, seek emergency medical care immediately
*This list is not all possible symptoms.
Please call your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 or call ahead to your local emergency facility: Notify the operator that you are seeking care for someone who has or may have COVID-19.
Yes.
It is possible to test positive for flu (as well as other respiratory infections) and COVID-19 at the same time.
Maybe; not everyone needs to be tested for COVID-19.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and want to get tested, call your healthcare provider first.
Most people will have mild illness and can recover at home without medical care and may not need to be tested.
CDC has guidance for who should be tested, but decisions about testing are made by state and local health departments and healthcare providers.
You can also visit your state or local health departments website to look for the latest local information on testing.
Decisions about testing are made by state and localexternal icon health departments or healthcare providers.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and are not tested, it is important to stay home.
What to do if you are sick.
COVID-19 testing differs by location.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and want to get tested, call your healthcare provider first.
You can also visit your state or localexternal icon health departments website to look for the latest local information on testing.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized viral tests that let you collect either a nasal swabexternal icon or a saliva sampleexternal icon at home.
However, you will still need to send your sample to a laboratory for analysis.
If you test positive for COVID-19, know what protective steps to take if you are sick or caring for someone.
If you test negative for COVID-19, you probably were not infected at the time your sample was collected.
However, that does not mean you will not get sick.
The test result only means that you did not have COVID-19 at the time of testing.
You might test negative if the sample was collected early in your infection and test positive later during your illness.
You could also be exposed to COVID-19 after the test and get infected then.
This means you could still spread the virus.
If you develop symptoms later, you might need another test to determine if you are infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.
For more information about viral tests, please visit Test for Current Infection.
Antibody tests for COVID-19 are available through healthcare providers and laboratories.
Check with your healthcare provider to see if they offer antibody tests and whether you should get one.
A positive test result shows you might have antibodies from an infection with the virus that causes COVID-19.
However, there is a chance a positive result means that you have antibodies from an infection with a virus from the same family of viruses (called coronaviruses), such as the one that causes the common cold.
Having antibodies to the virus that causes COVID-19 might provide protection from getting infected with the virus again.
If it does, we do not know how much protection the antibodies might provide or how long this protection might last.
You should continue to protect yourself and others since you could get infected with the virus again.
If you test negative, you might not have ever had COVID-19.
Talk with your healthcare provider about your test result and the type of test you took to understand what your result means.
Regardless of whether you test positive or negative, the results do not confirm whether or not you are able to spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
Until we know more, continue to take steps to protect yourself and others.
If you want more information about antibody tests, see Test for Past Infection.
Yes, it is possible.
You may test negative if the sample was collected early in your infection and test positive later during this illness.
You could also be exposed to COVID-19 after the test and get infected then.
Even if you test negative, you still should take steps to protect yourself and others.
See Testing for Current Infection for more information.
COVID-19 is a new disease and there is limited information regarding risk factors for severe disease.
Based on currently available information and clinical expertise, older adults and people with underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
If you are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19, you should:
Most people with disabilities are not inherently at higher risk for becoming infected with or having severe illness from COVID-19.
Some people with physical limitations or other disabilities might be at a higher risk of infection because of their underlying medical condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Contact tracing has been used for decades by state and local health departments to slow or stop the spread of infectious diseases.
Contact tracing slows the spread of COVID-19 by
During contact tracing, the health department staff will not ask you for
Discussions with health department staff are confidential.
This means that your personal and medical information will be kept private and only shared with those who may need to know, like your health care provider.
If you have been diagnosed with COVID-19, your name will not be shared with those you came in contact with.
The health department will only notify people you were in close contact with (within 6 feet for more than 15 minutes) that they might have been exposed to COVID-19.
Each state and jurisdiction use their own method for collecting and protecting health information.
To learn more, contact your state or local health department.
You may also be interested in: If I participate contact tracing for COVID-19 using a digital tool, is my personal health information secure?
For COVID-19, a close contact is anyone who was within 6 feet of an infected person for at least 15 minutes.
An infected person can spread COVID-19 starting 48 hours (or 2 days) before the person had any symptoms or tested positive for COVID-19.
Yes, you are still considered a close contact even if you were wearing a mask while you were around someone with COVID-19.
Masks are meant to protect other people in case you are infected, and not to protect you from becoming infected.
If you have been around someone who is sick with COVID-19, local authorities, the health department, or your doctor may recommend that you get tested for COVID-19.
The health department may be able to provide resources for testing in your area.
If you are diagnosed with COVID-19, someone from the health department may call you to check on your health, discuss who you have been around, and ask where you spent time while you may have been able to spread COVID-19 to others.
You will also be asked to continue to stay at home and self-isolate, away from others.
Watch for or monitor your symptoms of COVID-19.
If your symptoms worsen or become severe, you should seek medical care.
If you were around someone who has been diagnosed with COVID-19, someone from the health department may call you to let you know that you may have been exposed to COVID-19.
Stay home away from others for 14 days (self-quarantine) after your last contact with that person.
Health department staff will help identify the dates for your self-quarantine.
Health department staff can also provide resources for COVID-19 testing in your area.
Monitor your health and watch for symptoms of COVID-19.
Remember, symptoms may appear 2-14 days after you were exposed to COVID-19.
Tell the health department if you develop any symptoms.
Tell people you were around recently if you become ill, so they can monitor their health.
If your symptoms worsen or become severe, seek medical care.
Severe symptoms include trouble breathing, persistent pain or pressure in the chest, new confusion, inability to wake or stay awake, or bluish lips or face.
The health department staff will not ask you for
Yes.
You should still self-quarantine for 14 days since your last exposure.
It can take up to 14 days after exposure to the virus for a person to develop COVID-19 symptoms.
A negative result before end of the 14-day quarantine period does not rule out possible infection.
By self-quarantining for 14 days, you lower the chance of possibly exposing others to COVID-19.
People with COVID-19 can still spread the virus even if they dont have any symptoms.
If you were around someone who had COVID-19, it is critical that you stay home and away from others for 14 days from the last day that you were around that person.
Staying home and away from others at all times helps your health department in the fight against COVID-19 and helps protect you, your family, and your community.
If you have been around someone who was identified as a close contact to a person with COVID-19, closely monitor yourself for any symptoms of COVID-19.
You do not need to self-quarantine unless you develop symptoms or if the person identified as a close contact develops COVID-19.
No, there will not be a national app for contact tracing.
There are many options available now, and it is up to each state and individual to decide which tools best fit their needs.
Yes, if you agree to participate in contact tracing for COVID-19 with the health department, your information is secure.
Discussions with health department staff are confidential.
This means that your personal and medical information will be kept private and only shared with those who may need to know, like your health care provider.
Your name will not be shared with those you came in contact with.
If you have been diagnosed with COVID-19, the health department will only notify people you were in close contact with (within 6 feet for more than 15 minutes) that they might have been exposed to COVID-19.
Health departments may use case management tools to help make the contact tracing process more efficient.
If you choose to provide information through one of these tools, your information is secure and stored with the health department.
These tools also help health departments quickly receive and analyze information about COVID-19.
Case management tools are under the same laws and regulations for all sensitive health information use (e.g.
HIPPA).
You must provide consent for the health department to collect information using a case management tool.
Just like traditional contact tracing, digital tools will not collect information regarding money, Social Security numbers, bank account information, salary information, or credit card numbers.
Exposure notification tools may be an app that you can download on your personal cell phone.
If you choose to download an exposure notification app for COVID-19, your information is secure.
Exposure notification apps are developed in collaboration with or endorsed by health departments.
These apps undergo rigorous testing to determine their trustworthiness, security, and ability to protect peoples privacy.
Until you give consent to share information with your local health department, any information you have entered into the app is stored only on your personal phone.
Your information is stored only on your own phone and is not sent to the health department or any other third party.
The app and your information can be deleted any time.
When you consent to share your information with the local health department, your information is secure.
No, you are not required to download an app to give information for contact tracing for COVID-19.
Health departments commonly use case management tools to make the contact tracing process more efficient.
These types of tools are not downloaded on personal cell phones.
If you choose to give information to your local or state health department for contact tracing for COVID-19, you do not need to download an app on your cell phone.
The health department staff may call you to
It is up to you to decide if you download an exposure notification app for COVID-19.
There is currently no known risk associated with being in the same room at a funeral or visitation service with the body of someone who died of COVID-19.
See How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others to learn how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19, if you decide to attend a funeral or visitation.
COVID-19 is a new disease and we are still learning how it spreads.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
This type of spread is not a concern after death.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
This is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
People should consider not touching the body of someone who has died of COVID-19.
Older people and people of all ages with severe underlying health conditions are at higher risk of severe illness from COVID-19.
There may be less of a chance of the virus spreading from certain types of touching, such as holding the hand or hugging after the body has been prepared for viewing.
Other activities, such as kissing, washing, and shrouding should be avoided before, during, and after the body has been prepared, if possible.
If washing the body or shrouding are important religious or cultural practices, families are encouraged to work with their communitys cultural and religious leaders and funeral home staff on how to reduce their exposure as much as possible.
At a minimum, people conducting these activities should wear disposable gloves.
If splashing of fluids is expected, additional personal protective equipment (PPE) may be required (such as disposable gown, face shield, or goggles and N-95 respirator).
If desired, you may retrieve the belongings of a loved one who has died of COVID-19 outside their home (for example, in a hospital setting).
Depending on local rules and regulations, family members may retrieve these belongings at the funeral home or the healthcare facility.
You should use gloves and practice good hand hygiene when handling your loved ones belongings.
Depending on the type of belongings, such as electronics, you should also follow the household item-specific cleaning and disinfection guidelines when handling these items.
When a US citizen dies outside the United States, the deceased persons next of kin or legal representative should notify US consular officials at the Department of State.
Consular personnel are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, to provide assistance to US citizens for overseas emergencies.
If a family member, domestic partner, or legal representative is in a different country from the deceased person, he or she should call the Department of States Office of Overseas Citizens Services in Washington, DC, from 8 am to 5 pm Eastern time, Monday through Friday, at 888-407-4747 (toll-free) or 202-501-4444.
For emergency assistance after working hours or on weekends and holidays, call the Department of State switchboard at 202-647-4000 and ask to speak with the Overseas Citizens Services duty officer.
In addition, the US embassyexternal iconexternal iconexternal icon closest to or in the country where the US citizen died can provide assistance.
CDC does not require an autopsy before the remains of a person who died overseas are returned to the United States.
Depending on the circumstances surrounding the death, some countries may require an autopsy.
Sources of support to the family include the local consulate or embassy, travel insurance provider, tour operator, faith-based and aid organizations, and the deceaseds employer.
There likely will need to be an official identification of the body and official documents issued by the consular office.
CDC requirements for importing human remains depend upon if the body has been embalmed, cremated, or if the person died from a quarantinable communicable disease.
At this time, COVID-19 is a quarantinable communicable disease in the United States and the remains must meet the standards for importation found in 42 Code of Federal Regulations Part 71.55 and may be cleared, released, and authorized for entry into the United States only under the following conditions:
Please see CDCs guidance for additional information.
Cleaning with soap and water removes germs, dirt, and impurities from surfaces.
It lowers the risk of spreading infection.
Disinfecting kills germs on surfaces.
By killing germs on a surface after cleaning, it can further lower the risk of spreading infection.
The risk of transmitting or spreading SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, during vacuuming is unknown.
In order to reduce the need for cleaning, disinfection, and vacuuming, consider removing area rugs completely, if possible.
At this time, there are no reported cases of COVID-19 associated with vacuuming.
If vacuuming is necessary or required in a school, business, or community facility that was used by a person with suspected or confirmed COVID-19, first follow the CDC recommendations for Cleaning and Disinfection for Community Facilities that apply, which includes a wait time of 24 hours, or as long as practical.
After cleaning and disinfection, the following recommendations may help reduce the risk to workers and other individuals when vacuuming:
Routine cleaning is the everyday cleaning practices that businesses and communities normally use to maintain a healthy environment.
Surfaces frequently touched by multiple people, such as door handles, bathroom surfaces, and handrails, should be cleaned with soap and water or another detergent at least daily when facilities are in use.
More frequent cleaning and disinfection may be required based on level of use.
For example, certain surfaces and objects in public spaces, such as shopping carts and point of sale keypads, should be cleaned and disinfected before each use.
Cleaning removes dirt and impurities, including germs, from surfaces.
Cleaning alone does not kill germs, but it reduces the number of germs on a surface.
Cleaning does not kill germs, but by removing them, it lowers their numbers and the risk of spreading infection.
If a surface may have gotten the virus on it from a person with or suspected to have COVID-19, the surface should be cleaned and disinfected.
Disinfecting kills germs on surfaces.
Regular cleaning staff can clean and disinfect community spaces.
Cleaning staff should be trained on appropriate use of cleaning and disinfection chemicals and provided with the personal protective equipment (PPE) required for the chemicals used.
Companies do not necessarily need to close after a person with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 has been in a company facility.
The area(s) used or visited by the ill person should be closed for 24 hours or as long as possible.
Open outside doors and windows as much as possible ensuring that doing so does not pose a safety risk to children using the facility (i.e.
make sure that children are not able to enter the closed off area through any windows or doors).
and use ventilating fans to increase air circulation in the area.
Once the area has been appropriately disinfected, it can be opened for use.
Workers without close contact with the person with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 can return to work immediately after disinfection is completed.
The efficacy of these disinfection methods against the virus that causes COVID-19 is not known.
EPA only recommends use of the surface disinfectants identified on List Nexternal icon against the virus that causes COVID-19.
EPA does not routinely review the safety or efficacy of pesticidal devices, such as UV lights, LED lights, or ultrasonic devices.
Therefore, EPA cannot confirm whether, or under what circumstances, such products might be effective against the spread of COVID-19.
Outdoor areas generally require normal routine cleaning and do not require disinfection.
Spraying disinfectant on outdoor playgrounds is not an efficient use of disinfectant supplies and has not been proven to reduce the risk of COVID-19 to the public.
You should maintain existing cleaning and hygiene practices for outdoor areas.
If practical, high touch surfaces made of plastic or metal, such as grab bars and railings, should be cleaned routinely.
Cleaning and disinfection of wooden surfaces (e.g play structures, benches, tables) or groundcovers (e.g mulch, sand) is not recommended.
CDC does not recommend the use of sanitizing tunnels.
There is no evidence that they are effective in reducing the spread of COVID-19.
Chemicals used in sanitizing tunnels could cause skin, eye, or respiratory irritation or damage.
CDC does not recommend disinfection of sidewalks or roads.
Spraying disinfectant on sidewalks and roads is not an efficient use of disinfectant supplies and has not been proven to reduce the risk of COVID-19 to the public.
The risk of spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 from these surfaces is very low and disinfection is not effective on these surfaces.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
See If You Have Pets for more information about pets and COVID-19.
However, since animals can spread other diseases to people, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, such as washing your hands and maintaining good hygiene.
For more information on the many benefits of pet ownership, as well as staying safe and healthy around animals including pets, livestock, and wildlife, visit CDCs Healthy Pets, Healthy People website.
Although we know certain bacteria and fungi can be carried on fur and hair, there is no evidence that viruses, including the virus that causes COVID-19, can spread to people from the skin, fur, or hair of pets.
However, because animals can sometimes carry other germs that can make people sick, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, including washing hands before and after interacting with them.
Dog parks provide socialization and exercise for dogs, which is an important part of their wellbeing.
Because there is a risk that people with COVID-19 could spread it to animals, CDC recommends that you do not let pets interact with people outside of your household, especially in places with community spread of COVID-19.
Therefore, you should consider avoiding dog parks or other places where large numbers of people and dogs gather.
Some areas are allowing dog parks to open.
If you choose to go to a dog park, follow local guidelines.
There are ways to reduce the risk of you or your dog getting infected with COVID-19 if you go to a dog park.
See more information on pets and COVID-19 and recommendations for how to help keep your pet safe.
Until we know more about how this virus affects animals, CDC encourages pet owners to treat pets as you would other human family members to protect them from possible infection.
This means limiting contact between your pets and people outside your household as much as possible and avoiding places where large numbers of people gather.
Some areas are allowing groomers and boarding facilities such as dog daycares to open.
If you must take your pet to a groomer or boarding facility, follow any protocols put into place at the facility, such as wearing a mask and maintaining at least 6 feet of space between yourself and others if possible.
Limit pet items brought from home to the groomer or boarding facility, and disinfect any objects that are taken into a facility and returned home (such as leashes, bowls, and toys).
Use an EPA-registered disinfectantexternal icon to clean items and rinse thoroughly with clean water afterwards.
Do not wipe or bathe your pet with chemical disinfectants, alcohol, hydrogen peroxide, or other products, such as hand sanitizer, counter-cleaning wipes, or other industrial or surface cleaners.
If you have questions about appropriate products for bathing or cleaning your pet, talk to your veterinarian.
Do not put masks on pets, and do not take a sick pet to a groomer or boarding facility.
Signs of sickness in dogs may include fever, coughing, difficulty breathing or shortness of breath, lethargy, sneezing, discharge from the nose or eyes, vomiting, or diarrhea.
If you think your pet is sick, call your veterinarian.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
See more information on pets and COVID-19 and recommendations for how to help keep your pet safe.
Most pets that have gotten sick from the virus that causes COVID-19 were infected after close contact with a person with COVID-19.
Talk to your veterinarian about any health concerns you have about your pets.
If your pet gets sick after contact with a person with COVID-19, call your veterinarian and let them know the pet was around a person with COVID-19.
If you are sick with COVID-19, do not take your pet to the veterinary clinic yourself.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
Routine testing of animals for COVID-19 is not recommended at this time.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
However, it appears that the virus that causes COVID-19 can spread from people to animals after close contact with people with COVID-19.
Until we learn more about how this virus affects animals, use similar precautions for pets and other animals in your facility as you would for other people in your facility.
This will help protect both people and pets in your facility from COVID-19.
Talk to a veterinarian if a pet in your facility gets sick or if you have any concerns about the health of any pets in the facility.
If you think a pet in the facility was exposed to or is showing signs consistent with COVID-19, contact your state health official to discuss guidance on testing pets or other animals for the virus that causes COVID-19.
People who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 should avoid providing care for sick pets, if possible.
For more information, visit CDCs If You Have Pets webpage.
CDC does not have any evidence to suggest that imported animals or animal products pose a risk for spreading COVID-19 in the United States.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
CDC, the U. S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) play distinct but complementary roles in regulating the importation of live animals and animal products into the United States.
Please refer to CDCs requirements for bringing a dog to the United States.
The current requirements for rabies vaccination apply to dogs imported from high-risk countries for rabies.
Imported animals will need to meet CDC and USDAsexternal iconexternal icon requirements for entering the United States.
At this time, there is no evidence that companion animals, including pets and service animals, can spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
As with any animal introduced to a new environment, animals recently imported should be observed daily for signs of illness.
If an animal becomes ill, the animal should be examined by a veterinarian.
Call your local veterinary clinic before bringing the animal into the clinic and let them know that the animal was recently imported from another country.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
Currently, there is no evidence to suggest the virus that causes COVID-19 is circulating in free-living wildlife in the United States, or that wildlife might be a source of infection for people in the United States.
If a wild animal were to become infected with the virus, we dont know whether the infection could then spread among wildlife or if it could spread to other animals, including pets.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals, including wildlife, could be affected by COVID-19.
Because wildlife can carry other diseases, even without looking sick, it is always important to enjoy wildlife from a distance.
Take steps to prevent getting sick from wildlife in the United States:
See COVID-19 and Animals for more information.
Other coronaviruses have been found in North American bats in the past, but there is currently no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 is present in any free-living wildlife in the United States, including bats.
In general, coronaviruses do not cause illness or death in bats, but we dont yet know if this new coronavirus would make North American species of bats sick.
Bats are an important part of natural ecosystems, and their populations are already declining in the United States.
Bat populations could be further threatened by the disease itself or by harm inflicted on bats resulting from a misconception that bats are spreading COVID-19.
However, there is no evidence that bats in the United States are a source of the virus that causes COVID-19 for people.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how bats could be affected by COVID-19.
Currently, there is no evidence that you can get infected with the virus that causes COVID-19 by eating food, including wild hunted game meat.
However, hunters can get infected with other diseases when processing or eating game.
Hunters should always practice good hygiene when processing animals by following these food safety recommendations:
You should follow your state and/or local jurisdictional guidance regarding continuing operations at your facility.
There have not been any reports of horses testing positive for the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
COVID-19 is primarily spread from person to person, so steps should be taken to reduce the risks for people visiting your facility.
For more information, see Guidance on Preparing Workplaces for COVID-19pdf iconexternal icon and Interim Guidance for Businesses and Employers to Plan and Respond to Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Community mitigation is especially important before a vaccine or drug becomes widely available.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
Individual people, communities, schools, businesses, and healthcare organizations have a role to play in community mitigation.
Policies*, which include limits on large gatherings, restrictions on businesses, and school closures are often needed to fully put in place community mitigation strategies.
Each community is unique.
Because some actions can be very disruptive to daily life, mitigation activities will be different depending on how much disease has spread within the community, what the community population is like, and the ability to take these actions at the local level.
To identify appropriate activities, all parts of a community that might be affected need to be considered, including populations most vulnerable to severe illness, and those who might be more affected socially or economically.
When selecting mitigation activities, states and communities need to consider the spread of disease locally, characteristics of the people who live in the community (for example, age groups, languages spoken, overall health status), and the kind of public health resources and healthcare systems (like hospitals) that are available in the community.
State and local officials may need to adjust community mitigation activities and immediately take steps to scale them up or down depending on the changing local situation.
Putting mitigation into practice is based on
*CDC cannot address the policies of any business or organization.
CDC shares recommendations based on the best available science to help people make decisions that improve their health and safety.
In all cases, follow the guidance of your healthcare provider and local health department.
Local decisions depend on local circumstances.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
Currently there is no evidence that people can get COVID-19 by eating or handling food.
It may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object, such as a food package or dining ware that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
There is also no current evidence that people can get COVID-19 by drinking water.
The COVID-19 virus has not been detected in drinking water.
Conventional water treatment methods that use filtration and disinfection, such as those in most municipal drinking water systems, should remove or kill the virus that causes COVID-19.​ Learn more about food and COVID-19.
The virus that causes COVID-19 has not been detected in treated drinking water.
Water treatment plants use filters and disinfectants to remove or kill germs, like the virus that causes COVID-19.
The Environmental Protection Agency regulates water treatment plants to ensure that treated water is safe to drink.
Currently, there is no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 can be spread to people by drinking treated water.
COVID-19 is spread mainly through close contact from person-to-person.
You can continue to use and drink water from your tap as usual.
The virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in the feces of some patients diagnosed with COVID-19.
However, it is unclear whether the virus found in feces may be capable of causing COVID-19.
There has not been any confirmed report of the virus spreading from feces to a person.
Scientists also do not know how much risk there is that the virus could be spread from the feces of an infected person to another person.
However, they think this risk is low based on data from previous outbreaks of diseases caused by related coronaviruses, such as severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS).
Recently, ribonucleic acid (RNA) from the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater, and no information to date that anyone has become sick with COVID-19 because of exposure to wastewater.
At this time, the risk of transmission of the virus that causes COVID-19 through properly designed and maintained sewerage systems is thought to be low.
Recently, ribonucleic acid (RNA) from the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater, and no information to date that anyone has become sick with COVID-19 because of exposure to wastewater.
Standard practices associated with wastewater treatment plant operations should be sufficient to protect wastewater workers from the virus that causes COVID-19.
These standard practices can include engineering and administrative controls, hygiene precautions, specific safe work practices, and personal protective equipment (PPE) normally required when handling untreated wastewater.
No additional COVID-19–specific protections are recommended for workers involved in wastewater management, including those at wastewater treatment facilities.
See Information for Wastewater and Sanitation System Workers on COVID-19 for additional information.
In most cases, it is safe to wash your hands with soap and tap water during a Boil Water Advisory.
Follow the guidance from your local public health officials.
If soap and water are not available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in pools, hot tubs, or water playgrounds.
Plus, proper operation of public pools, hot tubs, and water playgrounds (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) and disinfection of the water (with chlorine or bromine) should inactivate the virus.
The virus mainly spreads when respiratory droplets from infected people land in the mouths or noses of others or possibly when inhaled into the lungs by others.
If a public pool, hot tub, or water playground is open, it is important for all visitors and staff to take steps to slow the spread of the virus:
See Considerations for Public Pools, Hot Tubs, and Water Playgrounds for more information.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in pools, including saltwater pools.
Plus, proper operation of public pools (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) and disinfection of the water (with chlorine or bromine) should inactivate the virus.
Saltwater pools are chlorinated pools.
In traditional pools, chlorine products (such as granules or liquid bleach) are added to the water to disinfect it.
In saltwater pools, table salt (made up of sodium and chloride) is added to the water, and an electrical current is then run through the water with dissolved salt.
This creates the same disinfecting form of chlorine that is created when chlorine products are added to the water in traditional pools.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in lakes, oceans, rivers, or other natural bodies of water.
The virus mainly spreads when respiratory droplets from infected people land in the mouths or noses of others or possibly when inhaled into the lungs by others.
If a public beach or other swim area in a natural body of water is open, it is important for all visitors and staff to take steps to slow the spread of the virus:
See Considerations for Public Beaches for more information.
RNAexternal icon of the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater, which can come from combined sewer overflowsexternal icon (rainwater runoff, domestic sewage, and industrial wastewater) and other sourcesexternal icon (such as, leaking septic tanks or animal waste from farms nearby) and enter swim areas.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater.
Plus, CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus being spread by swallowing or coming in contact with water contaminated by feces (poop) from an infected person.
At lakes, oceans, and rivers with routine water quality monitoring programs, staff look for changes in fecal (poop) contamination of the water.
Water quality advisories and beach closures alert the public to avoid getting in or on the water because of increased fecal contamination.
Learn more about healthy swimming in natural bodies of water and access water quality information by state.
No, do NOT wear a cloth mask in the water.
It can be difficult to breathe through a cloth mask when it is wet.
Plus, wet cloth masks dont slow the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19 as well as dry cloth masks.
All of this means it is particularly important to stay at least 6 feet apart in the water from people you dont live with.
In case cloth masks do get wet by mistake, bring a second (or extra) cloth mask for everyone heading out to the public pool or beach.
CDC does not yet have evidence on the effectiveness of different types of cloth materials.
Wearing cloth masks can help prevent people infected with the virus that causes COVID-19 from spreading the virus.
Make sure your cloth mask:
Cloth masks should NOT be worn by children less than 2 years old or anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Learn more about how to wear, take off, and wash your cloth masks.
The design of the public pool, hot tub, or water playground and surrounding deck and if visitors live together or not will affect how many people can stay at least 6 feet apart from those they dont live with.
CDC recommends operators of public pools, hot tubs, and water playgrounds:
Operators might want to limit the number of people in and around the water so if the water needs to be evacuated (because of lightning or other health or safety threat) social distancing can be maintained on the deck.
Otherwise, if the water is evacuated and social distancing cannot be maintained on the deck, close the deck to visitors.
There is no standard formula to determine how many people can maintain social distancing in the water and on the surrounding deck.
See Considerations for Public Pools, Hot Tubs, and Water Playgrounds for more information.
No.
Only List N disinfectants approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agencyexternal icon should be used to disinfect surfaces (such as handrails and in bathrooms) and shared objects (such as kickboards and pool noodles).
The list includes hundreds of disinfectants.
Operators of public pools, hot tubs, or water playgrounds (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) should consult with the design company or engineer to determine which disinfectants are best suited for surfaces and with manufacturers to determine which disinfectants are best suited for shared objects.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectants.
We dont know yet.
Early scientific data suggest that SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, can be inactivated by the suns UV light.
However, the ability of the suns UV light to inactivate the virus on surfaces (such as handrails and in bathrooms) and shared objects (such as kickboards and pool noodles) needs more research.
Factors — such as cloudiness, latitude (distance from equator), time of day, and amount of time exposed to the suns UV light — will determine how effectively the virus is inactivated.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectantsexternal icon.
The more frequently a surface is touched by multiple people, the more frequently it should be cleaned and then disinfected with a List N disinfectant approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agencyexternal icon.
Frequently touched surfaces should be cleaned and disinfected at least daily.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectants.
No.
RNAexternal icon of the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in feces (poop).
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in feces.
Plus, CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus being spread by swallowing or coming in contact with water contaminated by feces from an infected person.
As a result, CDC has not changed its fecal incident response recommendations.
Remember, do NOT vacuum feces out of the water.
Not when lifeguards are actively lifeguarding.
Lifeguards actively lifeguarding should not be doing other tasks that could distract them.
Drowning deaths have resulted, at least in part, from lifeguards being distracted.
Drowning can occur quickly and quietly.
Learn and take steps to prevent drowning.
Lifeguard trainers can consider the following steps to slow the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19:
CDC has more COVID-19–related considerations for public pools and public beaches and non-COVID-19–related healthy and safe swimming resources.
Help control the spread of rumors and be aware of fraud schemes.
1Fever may be subjective or confirmed
2Close contact is defined as—
a) being within approximately 6 feet (2 meters) of a COVID-19 case for a prolonged period of time; close contact can occur while caring for, living with, visiting, or sharing a health care waiting area or room with a COVID-19 case
b) having direct contact with infectious secretions of a COVID-19 case (e.g being coughed on)
If such contact occurs while not wearing recommended personal protective equipment or PPE (e.g gowns, gloves, NIOSH-certified disposable N95 respirator, eye protection), criteria for PUI consideration are met
See CDCs updated Interim Healthcare Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Persons Under Investigation for 2019 Novel Coronavirus.
Data to inform the definition of close contact are limited.
Considerations when assessing close contact include the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk) and the clinical symptoms of the person with COVID-19 (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk as does exposure to a severely ill patient).
Special consideration should be given to those exposed in health care settings.
A novel coronavirus is a new coronavirus that has not been previously identified.
The virus causing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), is not the same as the coronaviruses that commonly circulate among humans and cause mild illness, like the common cold.
On February 11, 2020 the World Health Organization announced an official name for the disease that is causing the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak, first identified in Wuhan China.
The new name of this disease is coronavirus disease 2019, abbreviated as COVID-19.
In COVID-19, ‘CO stands for ‘corona, ‘VI for ‘virus, and ‘D for disease.
Formerly, this disease was referred to as 2019 novel coronavirus or 2019-nCoV.
There are many types of human coronaviruses including some that commonly cause mild upper-respiratory tract illnesses.
COVID-19 is a new disease, caused by a novel (or new) coronavirus that has not previously been seen in humans.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person to person, mainly through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
Spread is more likely when people are in close contact with one another (within about 6 feet).
COVID-19 seems to be spreading easily and sustainably in the community (community spread) in many affected geographic areas.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
It is not yet known whether weather and temperature affect the spread of COVID-19.
Some other viruses, like those that cause the common cold and flu, spread more during cold weather months but that does not mean it is impossible to become sick with these viruses during other months.
There is much more to learn about the transmissibility, severity, and other features associated with COVID-19 and investigations are ongoing.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Each health department determines community spread differently based on local conditions.
For information on community spread in your area, please visit your health departments website.​
At this time, CDC has no data to suggest that this new coronavirus or other similar coronaviruses are spread by mosquitoes or ticks.
The main way that COVID-19 spreads is from person to person.
See How Coronavirus Spreads for more information.
Visit the How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others page to learn about how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19.
Wear masks in public settings when around people not living in your household and particularly where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, such as grocery stores, pharmacies, and gas stations.
Masks may slow the spread of the virus and help people who may have the virus and do not know it from transmitting it to others.
COVID-19 can be spread by people who do not have symptoms and do not know that they are infected.
Thats why its important for everyone to practice social distancing (staying at least 6 feet away from other people) and wear masks in public settings.
Masks provide an extra layer to help prevent the respiratory droplets from traveling in the air and onto other people.
The masks recommended are not surgical masks or N-95 respirators.
Those are critical supplies that must continue to be reserved for healthcare workers and other medical first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
More information about masks can be found on our masks site.
For more information, see Groups at Higher Risk for Severe Illness.
There is still a lot that is unknown about COVID-19 and how it spreads.
Coronaviruses are thought to be spread most often by respiratory droplets.
Although the virus can survive for a short period on some surfaces, it is unlikely to be spread from domestic or international mail, products or packaging.
However, it may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Learn more about safe handling of deliveries and mail.
In healthcare settings across the United States, donated blood is a lifesaving, essential part of caring for patients.
The need for donated blood is constant, and blood centers are open and in urgent need of donations.
CDC encourages people who are well to continue to donate blood if they are able, even if they are practicing social distancing because of COVID-19.
CDC is supporting blood centers by providing recommendations that will keep donors and staff safe.
Examples of these recommendations include spacing donor chairs 6 feet apart, thoroughly adhering to environmental cleaning practices, and encouraging donors to make donation appointments ahead of time.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Handwashing is one of the best ways to protect yourself and your family from getting sick.
Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing; going to the bathroom; and before eating or preparing food.
If soap and water are not readily available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces such as tables, doorknobs, light switches, countertops, handles, desks, phones, keyboards, toilets, faucets, and sinks.
If surfaces are dirty, clean them using detergent or soap and water prior to disinfection.
To disinfect, most common EPA-registered household disinfectants will work.
See CDCs recommendations for household cleaning and disinfection.
Most people who get COVID-19 will be able to recover at home.
CDC has directions for people who are recovering at home and their caregivers, including:
However, some people may need emergency medical attention.
Watch for symptoms and learn when to seek emergency medical attention.
When to Seek Emergency Medical Attention
Look for emergency warning signs* for COVID-19.
If someone is showing any of these signs, seek emergency medical care immediately
*This list is not all possible symptoms.
Please call your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 or call ahead to your local emergency facility: Notify the operator that you are seeking care for someone who has or may have COVID-19.
Based on available evidence, children do not appear to be at higher risk for COVID-19 than adults.
While some children and infants have been sick with COVID-19, adults make up most of the known cases to date.
However, a few children have developed multisystem inflammatory syndrome (MIS-C).
Currently, information about this syndrome is limited.
CDC is working with state and local health departments to learn more about MIS-C.
You can encourage your child to help stop the spread of COVID-19 by teaching them to do the same things everyone should do to stay healthy.
You can find additional information on preventing COVID-19 at How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others.
More information on Keeping Children Healthy during the COVID-19 Outbreak is available online.
No.
The symptoms of COVID-19 are similar in children and adults.
COVID-19 can look different in different people.
For many people, being sick with COVID-19 would be a little bit like having the flu.
People can get a fever, cough, or have a hard time taking deep breaths.
Most people who have gotten COVID-19 have not gotten very sick.
Only a small group of people who get it have had more serious problems.
CDC and partners are investigating cases of multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) associated with COVID-19.
Learn more about COVID-19 and multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C).
CDC recommends that everyone 2 years and older wear a mask that covers their nose and mouth in public settings when around people not living in your household, particularly where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain.
Masks should NOT be put on babies or children younger than 2 because of the danger of suffocation.
Children younger than 2 years of age are listed as an exception as well as anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Outbreaks can be stressful for adults and children.
When you talk with your child, try to stay calm, and reassure them that they are safe.
Talk to your children about COVID-19 and help them cope with stress.
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) is a condition where different body parts can become inflamed, including the heart, lungs, kidneys, brain, skin, eyes, or gastrointestinal organs.
We do not yet know what causes MIS-C.
However, we know that many children with MIS-C had the virus that causes COVID-19, or had been around someone with COVID-19.
MIS-C can be serious, even deadly, but most children who were diagnosed with this condition have gotten better with medical care.
Contact your childs doctor, nurse, or clinic right away if your child is showing symptoms of MIS-C. Seek emergency care right away if your child is showing any of these emergency warning signs of MIS-C or other concerning signs.
The key to slowing the spread of COVID-19 is to practice social distancing.
While school is out, children should not have in-person playdates with children from other households.
If children are playing outside their own homes, it is essential that they remain 6 feet from anyone who is not in their own household.
Some children with certain underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Make sure children practice everyday preventive behaviors, such as washing their hands often with soap and water.
Remember, if children meet outside of school in groups, it can put everyone at risk.
For more information, see Help Stop the Spread of COVID-19 in Children.
For more information, see Help Children Learn at Home.
Check with your school on plans to continue meal services during the school dismissal.
Many schools are keeping school facilities open to allow families to pick up meals or are providing grab-and-go meals at a central location.
For more information, see Keep Children Healthy during the COVID-19 Outbreak.
Older adults and people who have serious underlying medical conditions are at highest risk of getting sick from COVID-19.
Its not known yet whether all children with underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Although most COVID-19 cases in children are not severe, serious illness that needs to be treated at the hospital still happens.
Some data on children reported that the majority who needed hospitalization for COVID-19 had at least one underlying medical condition.
The most common underlying conditions reported among children with COVID-19 include chronic lung disease (including asthma), heart disease, and conditions that weaken the immune system.
This information suggests that children with these underlying medical conditions may be at risk for more severe illness from COVID-19.
More data are needed to learn which underlying or complex medical conditions may put children at increased risk.
CDC is monitoring new information as it becomes available and will provide updates as needed.
Learn more about caring for children with special health care needs during a disaster and people who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
In addition to following the recommendations to prevent getting sick and running essential errands, families should take extra steps recommended for persons with higher risk of severe COVID-19 illness and steps outlined for those with potential COVID-19 exposure or confirmed illness.
Helping children understand and follow recommendations, like social distancing and wearing masks, can be challenging if your child has intellectual disabilities, sensory issues, or other special healthcare needs.
Supporting children with special healthcare needs can put additional demands and stress on families, especially during emergency situations.
You have likely found ways to manage the stress and challenges unique to your familys situation.
It is important to continue your familys coping methods, including reaching out to other family members, friends, support groups, and organizations that have been helpful in the past.
See information on helping children cope and coping with stress (such as visiting parks, trails, or open spaces) and making your family stronger.
If you, or someone you care about, are feeling overwhelmed with emotions like sadness, depression, or anxiety, or feel like you want to harm yourself or others:
If your child with special healthcare needs becomes sick with symptoms of COVID-19, contact your childs healthcare provider.
If your child has new or worsening emergency warning signs, such as trouble breathing, pain or pressure in the chest, confusion or inability to wake them up, or bluish lips or face, call 911.
If you think your child may have COVID-19, notify the operator so that first responders may be appropriately prepared to protect themselves and others.
Notify your childs healthcare provider if someone else in your house becomes sick with COVID-19, so they can provide any advice specific for your child.
See additional information if someone in the home is sick with COVID-19 or suspected of having COVID-19.
If your childs healthcare provider tells you to go to the hospital for any health problem, including COVID-19
Create a household plan of action to help protect your health and the health of those you care about in the event of an outbreak of COVID-19 in your community:
Plan for potential changes at your workplace.
Talk to your employer about their emergency operations plan, including sick-leave policies and telework options.
Learn how businesses and employers can plan for and respond to COVID-19.
CDC does not encourage the production and use of homemade hand sanitizer products because of concerns over the correct use of the ingredientsexternal icon and the need to work under sterile conditions to make the product.
Local industries that are looking into producing hand sanitizer to fill in for commercial shortages can refer to the World Health Organization guidance.pdf iconexternal icon Organizations should revert to the use of commercially produced, FDA-approved product once such supplies again become available.
People with COVID-19 have reported a wide range of symptoms – from mild symptoms to severe illness.
Symptoms may appear 2-14 days after exposure to the virus.
If you have fever, cough, or other symptoms, you might have COVID-19.
Look for emergency warning signs* for COVID-19.
If someone is showing any of these signs, seek emergency medical care immediately
*This list is not all possible symptoms.
Please call your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 or call ahead to your local emergency facility: Notify the operator that you are seeking care for someone who has or may have COVID-19.
Yes.
It is possible to test positive for flu (as well as other respiratory infections) and COVID-19 at the same time.
Maybe; not everyone needs to be tested for COVID-19.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and want to get tested, call your healthcare provider first.
Most people will have mild illness and can recover at home without medical care and may not need to be tested.
CDC has guidance for who should be tested, but decisions about testing are made by state and local health departments and healthcare providers.
You can also visit your state or local health departments website to look for the latest local information on testing.
Decisions about testing are made by state and localexternal icon health departments or healthcare providers.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and are not tested, it is important to stay home.
What to do if you are sick.
COVID-19 testing differs by location.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and want to get tested, call your healthcare provider first.
You can also visit your state or localexternal icon health departments website to look for the latest local information on testing.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized viral tests that let you collect either a nasal swabexternal icon or a saliva sampleexternal icon at home.
However, you will still need to send your sample to a laboratory for analysis.
If you test positive for COVID-19, know what protective steps to take if you are sick or caring for someone.
If you test negative for COVID-19, you probably were not infected at the time your sample was collected.
However, that does not mean you will not get sick.
The test result only means that you did not have COVID-19 at the time of testing.
You might test negative if the sample was collected early in your infection and test positive later during your illness.
You could also be exposed to COVID-19 after the test and get infected then.
This means you could still spread the virus.
If you develop symptoms later, you might need another test to determine if you are infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.
For more information about viral tests, please visit Test for Current Infection.
Antibody tests for COVID-19 are available through healthcare providers and laboratories.
Check with your healthcare provider to see if they offer antibody tests and whether you should get one.
A positive test result shows you might have antibodies from an infection with the virus that causes COVID-19.
However, there is a chance a positive result means that you have antibodies from an infection with a virus from the same family of viruses (called coronaviruses), such as the one that causes the common cold.
Having antibodies to the virus that causes COVID-19 might provide protection from getting infected with the virus again.
If it does, we do not know how much protection the antibodies might provide or how long this protection might last.
You should continue to protect yourself and others since you could get infected with the virus again.
If you test negative, you might not have ever had COVID-19.
Talk with your healthcare provider about your test result and the type of test you took to understand what your result means.
Regardless of whether you test positive or negative, the results do not confirm whether or not you are able to spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
Until we know more, continue to take steps to protect yourself and others.
If you want more information about antibody tests, see Test for Past Infection.
Yes, it is possible.
You may test negative if the sample was collected early in your infection and test positive later during this illness.
You could also be exposed to COVID-19 after the test and get infected then.
Even if you test negative, you still should take steps to protect yourself and others.
See Testing for Current Infection for more information.
COVID-19 is a new disease and there is limited information regarding risk factors for severe disease.
Based on currently available information and clinical expertise, older adults and people with underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
If you are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19, you should:
Most people with disabilities are not inherently at higher risk for becoming infected with or having severe illness from COVID-19.
Some people with physical limitations or other disabilities might be at a higher risk of infection because of their underlying medical condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Contact tracing has been used for decades by state and local health departments to slow or stop the spread of infectious diseases.
Contact tracing slows the spread of COVID-19 by
During contact tracing, the health department staff will not ask you for
Discussions with health department staff are confidential.
This means that your personal and medical information will be kept private and only shared with those who may need to know, like your health care provider.
If you have been diagnosed with COVID-19, your name will not be shared with those you came in contact with.
The health department will only notify people you were in close contact with (within 6 feet for more than 15 minutes) that they might have been exposed to COVID-19.
Each state and jurisdiction use their own method for collecting and protecting health information.
To learn more, contact your state or local health department.
You may also be interested in: If I participate contact tracing for COVID-19 using a digital tool, is my personal health information secure?
For COVID-19, a close contact is anyone who was within 6 feet of an infected person for at least 15 minutes.
An infected person can spread COVID-19 starting 48 hours (or 2 days) before the person had any symptoms or tested positive for COVID-19.
Yes, you are still considered a close contact even if you were wearing a mask while you were around someone with COVID-19.
Masks are meant to protect other people in case you are infected, and not to protect you from becoming infected.
If you have been around someone who is sick with COVID-19, local authorities, the health department, or your doctor may recommend that you get tested for COVID-19.
The health department may be able to provide resources for testing in your area.
If you are diagnosed with COVID-19, someone from the health department may call you to check on your health, discuss who you have been around, and ask where you spent time while you may have been able to spread COVID-19 to others.
You will also be asked to continue to stay at home and self-isolate, away from others.
Watch for or monitor your symptoms of COVID-19.
If your symptoms worsen or become severe, you should seek medical care.
If you were around someone who has been diagnosed with COVID-19, someone from the health department may call you to let you know that you may have been exposed to COVID-19.
Stay home away from others for 14 days (self-quarantine) after your last contact with that person.
Health department staff will help identify the dates for your self-quarantine.
Health department staff can also provide resources for COVID-19 testing in your area.
Monitor your health and watch for symptoms of COVID-19.
Remember, symptoms may appear 2-14 days after you were exposed to COVID-19.
Tell the health department if you develop any symptoms.
Tell people you were around recently if you become ill, so they can monitor their health.
If your symptoms worsen or become severe, seek medical care.
Severe symptoms include trouble breathing, persistent pain or pressure in the chest, new confusion, inability to wake or stay awake, or bluish lips or face.
The health department staff will not ask you for
Yes.
You should still self-quarantine for 14 days since your last exposure.
It can take up to 14 days after exposure to the virus for a person to develop COVID-19 symptoms.
A negative result before end of the 14-day quarantine period does not rule out possible infection.
By self-quarantining for 14 days, you lower the chance of possibly exposing others to COVID-19.
People with COVID-19 can still spread the virus even if they dont have any symptoms.
If you were around someone who had COVID-19, it is critical that you stay home and away from others for 14 days from the last day that you were around that person.
Staying home and away from others at all times helps your health department in the fight against COVID-19 and helps protect you, your family, and your community.
If you have been around someone who was identified as a close contact to a person with COVID-19, closely monitor yourself for any symptoms of COVID-19.
You do not need to self-quarantine unless you develop symptoms or if the person identified as a close contact develops COVID-19.
No, there will not be a national app for contact tracing.
There are many options available now, and it is up to each state and individual to decide which tools best fit their needs.
Yes, if you agree to participate in contact tracing for COVID-19 with the health department, your information is secure.
Discussions with health department staff are confidential.
This means that your personal and medical information will be kept private and only shared with those who may need to know, like your health care provider.
Your name will not be shared with those you came in contact with.
If you have been diagnosed with COVID-19, the health department will only notify people you were in close contact with (within 6 feet for more than 15 minutes) that they might have been exposed to COVID-19.
Health departments may use case management tools to help make the contact tracing process more efficient.
If you choose to provide information through one of these tools, your information is secure and stored with the health department.
These tools also help health departments quickly receive and analyze information about COVID-19.
Case management tools are under the same laws and regulations for all sensitive health information use (e.g.
HIPPA).
You must provide consent for the health department to collect information using a case management tool.
Just like traditional contact tracing, digital tools will not collect information regarding money, Social Security numbers, bank account information, salary information, or credit card numbers.
Exposure notification tools may be an app that you can download on your personal cell phone.
If you choose to download an exposure notification app for COVID-19, your information is secure.
Exposure notification apps are developed in collaboration with or endorsed by health departments.
These apps undergo rigorous testing to determine their trustworthiness, security, and ability to protect peoples privacy.
Until you give consent to share information with your local health department, any information you have entered into the app is stored only on your personal phone.
Your information is stored only on your own phone and is not sent to the health department or any other third party.
The app and your information can be deleted any time.
When you consent to share your information with the local health department, your information is secure.
No, you are not required to download an app to give information for contact tracing for COVID-19.
Health departments commonly use case management tools to make the contact tracing process more efficient.
These types of tools are not downloaded on personal cell phones.
If you choose to give information to your local or state health department for contact tracing for COVID-19, you do not need to download an app on your cell phone.
The health department staff may call you to
It is up to you to decide if you download an exposure notification app for COVID-19.
There is currently no known risk associated with being in the same room at a funeral or visitation service with the body of someone who died of COVID-19.
See How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others to learn how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19, if you decide to attend a funeral or visitation.
COVID-19 is a new disease and we are still learning how it spreads.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
This type of spread is not a concern after death.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
This is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
People should consider not touching the body of someone who has died of COVID-19.
Older people and people of all ages with severe underlying health conditions are at higher risk of severe illness from COVID-19.
There may be less of a chance of the virus spreading from certain types of touching, such as holding the hand or hugging after the body has been prepared for viewing.
Other activities, such as kissing, washing, and shrouding should be avoided before, during, and after the body has been prepared, if possible.
If washing the body or shrouding are important religious or cultural practices, families are encouraged to work with their communitys cultural and religious leaders and funeral home staff on how to reduce their exposure as much as possible.
At a minimum, people conducting these activities should wear disposable gloves.
If splashing of fluids is expected, additional personal protective equipment (PPE) may be required (such as disposable gown, face shield, or goggles and N-95 respirator).
If desired, you may retrieve the belongings of a loved one who has died of COVID-19 outside their home (for example, in a hospital setting).
Depending on local rules and regulations, family members may retrieve these belongings at the funeral home or the healthcare facility.
You should use gloves and practice good hand hygiene when handling your loved ones belongings.
Depending on the type of belongings, such as electronics, you should also follow the household item-specific cleaning and disinfection guidelines when handling these items.
When a US citizen dies outside the United States, the deceased persons next of kin or legal representative should notify US consular officials at the Department of State.
Consular personnel are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, to provide assistance to US citizens for overseas emergencies.
If a family member, domestic partner, or legal representative is in a different country from the deceased person, he or she should call the Department of States Office of Overseas Citizens Services in Washington, DC, from 8 am to 5 pm Eastern time, Monday through Friday, at 888-407-4747 (toll-free) or 202-501-4444.
For emergency assistance after working hours or on weekends and holidays, call the Department of State switchboard at 202-647-4000 and ask to speak with the Overseas Citizens Services duty officer.
In addition, the US embassyexternal iconexternal iconexternal icon closest to or in the country where the US citizen died can provide assistance.
CDC does not require an autopsy before the remains of a person who died overseas are returned to the United States.
Depending on the circumstances surrounding the death, some countries may require an autopsy.
Sources of support to the family include the local consulate or embassy, travel insurance provider, tour operator, faith-based and aid organizations, and the deceaseds employer.
There likely will need to be an official identification of the body and official documents issued by the consular office.
CDC requirements for importing human remains depend upon if the body has been embalmed, cremated, or if the person died from a quarantinable communicable disease.
At this time, COVID-19 is a quarantinable communicable disease in the United States and the remains must meet the standards for importation found in 42 Code of Federal Regulations Part 71.55 and may be cleared, released, and authorized for entry into the United States only under the following conditions:
Please see CDCs guidance for additional information.
Cleaning with soap and water removes germs, dirt, and impurities from surfaces.
It lowers the risk of spreading infection.
Disinfecting kills germs on surfaces.
By killing germs on a surface after cleaning, it can further lower the risk of spreading infection.
The risk of transmitting or spreading SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, during vacuuming is unknown.
In order to reduce the need for cleaning, disinfection, and vacuuming, consider removing area rugs completely, if possible.
At this time, there are no reported cases of COVID-19 associated with vacuuming.
If vacuuming is necessary or required in a school, business, or community facility that was used by a person with suspected or confirmed COVID-19, first follow the CDC recommendations for Cleaning and Disinfection for Community Facilities that apply, which includes a wait time of 24 hours, or as long as practical.
After cleaning and disinfection, the following recommendations may help reduce the risk to workers and other individuals when vacuuming:
Routine cleaning is the everyday cleaning practices that businesses and communities normally use to maintain a healthy environment.
Surfaces frequently touched by multiple people, such as door handles, bathroom surfaces, and handrails, should be cleaned with soap and water or another detergent at least daily when facilities are in use.
More frequent cleaning and disinfection may be required based on level of use.
For example, certain surfaces and objects in public spaces, such as shopping carts and point of sale keypads, should be cleaned and disinfected before each use.
Cleaning removes dirt and impurities, including germs, from surfaces.
Cleaning alone does not kill germs, but it reduces the number of germs on a surface.
Cleaning does not kill germs, but by removing them, it lowers their numbers and the risk of spreading infection.
If a surface may have gotten the virus on it from a person with or suspected to have COVID-19, the surface should be cleaned and disinfected.
Disinfecting kills germs on surfaces.
Regular cleaning staff can clean and disinfect community spaces.
Cleaning staff should be trained on appropriate use of cleaning and disinfection chemicals and provided with the personal protective equipment (PPE) required for the chemicals used.
Companies do not necessarily need to close after a person with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 has been in a company facility.
The area(s) used or visited by the ill person should be closed for 24 hours or as long as possible.
Open outside doors and windows as much as possible ensuring that doing so does not pose a safety risk to children using the facility (i.e.
make sure that children are not able to enter the closed off area through any windows or doors).
and use ventilating fans to increase air circulation in the area.
Once the area has been appropriately disinfected, it can be opened for use.
Workers without close contact with the person with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 can return to work immediately after disinfection is completed.
The efficacy of these disinfection methods against the virus that causes COVID-19 is not known.
EPA only recommends use of the surface disinfectants identified on List Nexternal icon against the virus that causes COVID-19.
EPA does not routinely review the safety or efficacy of pesticidal devices, such as UV lights, LED lights, or ultrasonic devices.
Therefore, EPA cannot confirm whether, or under what circumstances, such products might be effective against the spread of COVID-19.
Outdoor areas generally require normal routine cleaning and do not require disinfection.
Spraying disinfectant on outdoor playgrounds is not an efficient use of disinfectant supplies and has not been proven to reduce the risk of COVID-19 to the public.
You should maintain existing cleaning and hygiene practices for outdoor areas.
If practical, high touch surfaces made of plastic or metal, such as grab bars and railings, should be cleaned routinely.
Cleaning and disinfection of wooden surfaces (e.g play structures, benches, tables) or groundcovers (e.g mulch, sand) is not recommended.
CDC does not recommend the use of sanitizing tunnels.
There is no evidence that they are effective in reducing the spread of COVID-19.
Chemicals used in sanitizing tunnels could cause skin, eye, or respiratory irritation or damage.
CDC does not recommend disinfection of sidewalks or roads.
Spraying disinfectant on sidewalks and roads is not an efficient use of disinfectant supplies and has not been proven to reduce the risk of COVID-19 to the public.
The risk of spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 from these surfaces is very low and disinfection is not effective on these surfaces.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
See If You Have Pets for more information about pets and COVID-19.
However, since animals can spread other diseases to people, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, such as washing your hands and maintaining good hygiene.
For more information on the many benefits of pet ownership, as well as staying safe and healthy around animals including pets, livestock, and wildlife, visit CDCs Healthy Pets, Healthy People website.
Although we know certain bacteria and fungi can be carried on fur and hair, there is no evidence that viruses, including the virus that causes COVID-19, can spread to people from the skin, fur, or hair of pets.
However, because animals can sometimes carry other germs that can make people sick, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, including washing hands before and after interacting with them.
Dog parks provide socialization and exercise for dogs, which is an important part of their wellbeing.
Because there is a risk that people with COVID-19 could spread it to animals, CDC recommends that you do not let pets interact with people outside of your household, especially in places with community spread of COVID-19.
Therefore, you should consider avoiding dog parks or other places where large numbers of people and dogs gather.
Some areas are allowing dog parks to open.
If you choose to go to a dog park, follow local guidelines.
There are ways to reduce the risk of you or your dog getting infected with COVID-19 if you go to a dog park.
See more information on pets and COVID-19 and recommendations for how to help keep your pet safe.
Until we know more about how this virus affects animals, CDC encourages pet owners to treat pets as you would other human family members to protect them from possible infection.
This means limiting contact between your pets and people outside your household as much as possible and avoiding places where large numbers of people gather.
Some areas are allowing groomers and boarding facilities such as dog daycares to open.
If you must take your pet to a groomer or boarding facility, follow any protocols put into place at the facility, such as wearing a mask and maintaining at least 6 feet of space between yourself and others if possible.
Limit pet items brought from home to the groomer or boarding facility, and disinfect any objects that are taken into a facility and returned home (such as leashes, bowls, and toys).
Use an EPA-registered disinfectantexternal icon to clean items and rinse thoroughly with clean water afterwards.
Do not wipe or bathe your pet with chemical disinfectants, alcohol, hydrogen peroxide, or other products, such as hand sanitizer, counter-cleaning wipes, or other industrial or surface cleaners.
If you have questions about appropriate products for bathing or cleaning your pet, talk to your veterinarian.
Do not put masks on pets, and do not take a sick pet to a groomer or boarding facility.
Signs of sickness in dogs may include fever, coughing, difficulty breathing or shortness of breath, lethargy, sneezing, discharge from the nose or eyes, vomiting, or diarrhea.
If you think your pet is sick, call your veterinarian.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
See more information on pets and COVID-19 and recommendations for how to help keep your pet safe.
Most pets that have gotten sick from the virus that causes COVID-19 were infected after close contact with a person with COVID-19.
Talk to your veterinarian about any health concerns you have about your pets.
If your pet gets sick after contact with a person with COVID-19, call your veterinarian and let them know the pet was around a person with COVID-19.
If you are sick with COVID-19, do not take your pet to the veterinary clinic yourself.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
Routine testing of animals for COVID-19 is not recommended at this time.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
However, it appears that the virus that causes COVID-19 can spread from people to animals after close contact with people with COVID-19.
Until we learn more about how this virus affects animals, use similar precautions for pets and other animals in your facility as you would for other people in your facility.
This will help protect both people and pets in your facility from COVID-19.
Talk to a veterinarian if a pet in your facility gets sick or if you have any concerns about the health of any pets in the facility.
If you think a pet in the facility was exposed to or is showing signs consistent with COVID-19, contact your state health official to discuss guidance on testing pets or other animals for the virus that causes COVID-19.
People who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 should avoid providing care for sick pets, if possible.
For more information, visit CDCs If You Have Pets webpage.
CDC does not have any evidence to suggest that imported animals or animal products pose a risk for spreading COVID-19 in the United States.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
CDC, the U. S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) play distinct but complementary roles in regulating the importation of live animals and animal products into the United States.
Please refer to CDCs requirements for bringing a dog to the United States.
The current requirements for rabies vaccination apply to dogs imported from high-risk countries for rabies.
Imported animals will need to meet CDC and USDAsexternal iconexternal icon requirements for entering the United States.
At this time, there is no evidence that companion animals, including pets and service animals, can spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
As with any animal introduced to a new environment, animals recently imported should be observed daily for signs of illness.
If an animal becomes ill, the animal should be examined by a veterinarian.
Call your local veterinary clinic before bringing the animal into the clinic and let them know that the animal was recently imported from another country.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
Currently, there is no evidence to suggest the virus that causes COVID-19 is circulating in free-living wildlife in the United States, or that wildlife might be a source of infection for people in the United States.
If a wild animal were to become infected with the virus, we dont know whether the infection could then spread among wildlife or if it could spread to other animals, including pets.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals, including wildlife, could be affected by COVID-19.
Because wildlife can carry other diseases, even without looking sick, it is always important to enjoy wildlife from a distance.
Take steps to prevent getting sick from wildlife in the United States:
See COVID-19 and Animals for more information.
Other coronaviruses have been found in North American bats in the past, but there is currently no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 is present in any free-living wildlife in the United States, including bats.
In general, coronaviruses do not cause illness or death in bats, but we dont yet know if this new coronavirus would make North American species of bats sick.
Bats are an important part of natural ecosystems, and their populations are already declining in the United States.
Bat populations could be further threatened by the disease itself or by harm inflicted on bats resulting from a misconception that bats are spreading COVID-19.
However, there is no evidence that bats in the United States are a source of the virus that causes COVID-19 for people.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how bats could be affected by COVID-19.
Currently, there is no evidence that you can get infected with the virus that causes COVID-19 by eating food, including wild hunted game meat.
However, hunters can get infected with other diseases when processing or eating game.
Hunters should always practice good hygiene when processing animals by following these food safety recommendations:
You should follow your state and/or local jurisdictional guidance regarding continuing operations at your facility.
There have not been any reports of horses testing positive for the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
COVID-19 is primarily spread from person to person, so steps should be taken to reduce the risks for people visiting your facility.
For more information, see Guidance on Preparing Workplaces for COVID-19pdf iconexternal icon and Interim Guidance for Businesses and Employers to Plan and Respond to Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Community mitigation is especially important before a vaccine or drug becomes widely available.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
Individual people, communities, schools, businesses, and healthcare organizations have a role to play in community mitigation.
Policies*, which include limits on large gatherings, restrictions on businesses, and school closures are often needed to fully put in place community mitigation strategies.
Each community is unique.
Because some actions can be very disruptive to daily life, mitigation activities will be different depending on how much disease has spread within the community, what the community population is like, and the ability to take these actions at the local level.
To identify appropriate activities, all parts of a community that might be affected need to be considered, including populations most vulnerable to severe illness, and those who might be more affected socially or economically.
When selecting mitigation activities, states and communities need to consider the spread of disease locally, characteristics of the people who live in the community (for example, age groups, languages spoken, overall health status), and the kind of public health resources and healthcare systems (like hospitals) that are available in the community.
State and local officials may need to adjust community mitigation activities and immediately take steps to scale them up or down depending on the changing local situation.
Putting mitigation into practice is based on
*CDC cannot address the policies of any business or organization.
CDC shares recommendations based on the best available science to help people make decisions that improve their health and safety.
In all cases, follow the guidance of your healthcare provider and local health department.
Local decisions depend on local circumstances.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
Currently there is no evidence that people can get COVID-19 by eating or handling food.
It may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object, such as a food package or dining ware that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
There is also no current evidence that people can get COVID-19 by drinking water.
The COVID-19 virus has not been detected in drinking water.
Conventional water treatment methods that use filtration and disinfection, such as those in most municipal drinking water systems, should remove or kill the virus that causes COVID-19.​ Learn more about food and COVID-19.
The virus that causes COVID-19 has not been detected in treated drinking water.
Water treatment plants use filters and disinfectants to remove or kill germs, like the virus that causes COVID-19.
The Environmental Protection Agency regulates water treatment plants to ensure that treated water is safe to drink.
Currently, there is no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 can be spread to people by drinking treated water.
COVID-19 is spread mainly through close contact from person-to-person.
You can continue to use and drink water from your tap as usual.
The virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in the feces of some patients diagnosed with COVID-19.
However, it is unclear whether the virus found in feces may be capable of causing COVID-19.
There has not been any confirmed report of the virus spreading from feces to a person.
Scientists also do not know how much risk there is that the virus could be spread from the feces of an infected person to another person.
However, they think this risk is low based on data from previous outbreaks of diseases caused by related coronaviruses, such as severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS).
Recently, ribonucleic acid (RNA) from the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater, and no information to date that anyone has become sick with COVID-19 because of exposure to wastewater.
At this time, the risk of transmission of the virus that causes COVID-19 through properly designed and maintained sewerage systems is thought to be low.
Recently, ribonucleic acid (RNA) from the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater, and no information to date that anyone has become sick with COVID-19 because of exposure to wastewater.
Standard practices associated with wastewater treatment plant operations should be sufficient to protect wastewater workers from the virus that causes COVID-19.
These standard practices can include engineering and administrative controls, hygiene precautions, specific safe work practices, and personal protective equipment (PPE) normally required when handling untreated wastewater.
No additional COVID-19–specific protections are recommended for workers involved in wastewater management, including those at wastewater treatment facilities.
See Information for Wastewater and Sanitation System Workers on COVID-19 for additional information.
In most cases, it is safe to wash your hands with soap and tap water during a Boil Water Advisory.
Follow the guidance from your local public health officials.
If soap and water are not available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in pools, hot tubs, or water playgrounds.
Plus, proper operation of public pools, hot tubs, and water playgrounds (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) and disinfection of the water (with chlorine or bromine) should inactivate the virus.
The virus mainly spreads when respiratory droplets from infected people land in the mouths or noses of others or possibly when inhaled into the lungs by others.
If a public pool, hot tub, or water playground is open, it is important for all visitors and staff to take steps to slow the spread of the virus:
See Considerations for Public Pools, Hot Tubs, and Water Playgrounds for more information.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in pools, including saltwater pools.
Plus, proper operation of public pools (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) and disinfection of the water (with chlorine or bromine) should inactivate the virus.
Saltwater pools are chlorinated pools.
In traditional pools, chlorine products (such as granules or liquid bleach) are added to the water to disinfect it.
In saltwater pools, table salt (made up of sodium and chloride) is added to the water, and an electrical current is then run through the water with dissolved salt.
This creates the same disinfecting form of chlorine that is created when chlorine products are added to the water in traditional pools.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in lakes, oceans, rivers, or other natural bodies of water.
The virus mainly spreads when respiratory droplets from infected people land in the mouths or noses of others or possibly when inhaled into the lungs by others.
If a public beach or other swim area in a natural body of water is open, it is important for all visitors and staff to take steps to slow the spread of the virus:
See Considerations for Public Beaches for more information.
RNAexternal icon of the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater, which can come from combined sewer overflowsexternal icon (rainwater runoff, domestic sewage, and industrial wastewater) and other sourcesexternal icon (such as, leaking septic tanks or animal waste from farms nearby) and enter swim areas.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater.
Plus, CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus being spread by swallowing or coming in contact with water contaminated by feces (poop) from an infected person.
At lakes, oceans, and rivers with routine water quality monitoring programs, staff look for changes in fecal (poop) contamination of the water.
Water quality advisories and beach closures alert the public to avoid getting in or on the water because of increased fecal contamination.
Learn more about healthy swimming in natural bodies of water and access water quality information by state.
No, do NOT wear a cloth mask in the water.
It can be difficult to breathe through a cloth mask when it is wet.
Plus, wet cloth masks dont slow the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19 as well as dry cloth masks.
All of this means it is particularly important to stay at least 6 feet apart in the water from people you dont live with.
In case cloth masks do get wet by mistake, bring a second (or extra) cloth mask for everyone heading out to the public pool or beach.
CDC does not yet have evidence on the effectiveness of different types of cloth materials.
Wearing cloth masks can help prevent people infected with the virus that causes COVID-19 from spreading the virus.
Make sure your cloth mask:
Cloth masks should NOT be worn by children less than 2 years old or anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Learn more about how to wear, take off, and wash your cloth masks.
The design of the public pool, hot tub, or water playground and surrounding deck and if visitors live together or not will affect how many people can stay at least 6 feet apart from those they dont live with.
CDC recommends operators of public pools, hot tubs, and water playgrounds:
Operators might want to limit the number of people in and around the water so if the water needs to be evacuated (because of lightning or other health or safety threat) social distancing can be maintained on the deck.
Otherwise, if the water is evacuated and social distancing cannot be maintained on the deck, close the deck to visitors.
There is no standard formula to determine how many people can maintain social distancing in the water and on the surrounding deck.
See Considerations for Public Pools, Hot Tubs, and Water Playgrounds for more information.
No.
Only List N disinfectants approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agencyexternal icon should be used to disinfect surfaces (such as handrails and in bathrooms) and shared objects (such as kickboards and pool noodles).
The list includes hundreds of disinfectants.
Operators of public pools, hot tubs, or water playgrounds (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) should consult with the design company or engineer to determine which disinfectants are best suited for surfaces and with manufacturers to determine which disinfectants are best suited for shared objects.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectants.
We dont know yet.
Early scientific data suggest that SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, can be inactivated by the suns UV light.
However, the ability of the suns UV light to inactivate the virus on surfaces (such as handrails and in bathrooms) and shared objects (such as kickboards and pool noodles) needs more research.
Factors — such as cloudiness, latitude (distance from equator), time of day, and amount of time exposed to the suns UV light — will determine how effectively the virus is inactivated.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectantsexternal icon.
The more frequently a surface is touched by multiple people, the more frequently it should be cleaned and then disinfected with a List N disinfectant approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agencyexternal icon.
Frequently touched surfaces should be cleaned and disinfected at least daily.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectants.
No.
RNAexternal icon of the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in feces (poop).
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in feces.
Plus, CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus being spread by swallowing or coming in contact with water contaminated by feces from an infected person.
As a result, CDC has not changed its fecal incident response recommendations.
Remember, do NOT vacuum feces out of the water.
Not when lifeguards are actively lifeguarding.
Lifeguards actively lifeguarding should not be doing other tasks that could distract them.
Drowning deaths have resulted, at least in part, from lifeguards being distracted.
Drowning can occur quickly and quietly.
Learn and take steps to prevent drowning.
Lifeguard trainers can consider the following steps to slow the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19:
CDC has more COVID-19–related considerations for public pools and public beaches and non-COVID-19–related healthy and safe swimming resources.
Help control the spread of rumors and be aware of fraud schemes.
1Fever may be subjective or confirmed
2Close contact is defined as—
a) being within approximately 6 feet (2 meters) of a COVID-19 case for a prolonged period of time; close contact can occur while caring for, living with, visiting, or sharing a health care waiting area or room with a COVID-19 case
b) having direct contact with infectious secretions of a COVID-19 case (e.g being coughed on)
If such contact occurs while not wearing recommended personal protective equipment or PPE (e.g gowns, gloves, NIOSH-certified disposable N95 respirator, eye protection), criteria for PUI consideration are met
See CDCs updated Interim Healthcare Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Persons Under Investigation for 2019 Novel Coronavirus.
Data to inform the definition of close contact are limited.
Considerations when assessing close contact include the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk) and the clinical symptoms of the person with COVID-19 (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk as does exposure to a severely ill patient).
Special consideration should be given to those exposed in health care settings.
A novel coronavirus is a new coronavirus that has not been previously identified.
The virus causing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), is not the same as the coronaviruses that commonly circulate among humans and cause mild illness, like the common cold.
On February 11, 2020 the World Health Organization announced an official name for the disease that is causing the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak, first identified in Wuhan China.
The new name of this disease is coronavirus disease 2019, abbreviated as COVID-19.
In COVID-19, ‘CO stands for ‘corona, ‘VI for ‘virus, and ‘D for disease.
Formerly, this disease was referred to as 2019 novel coronavirus or 2019-nCoV.
There are many types of human coronaviruses including some that commonly cause mild upper-respiratory tract illnesses.
COVID-19 is a new disease, caused by a novel (or new) coronavirus that has not previously been seen in humans.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person to person, mainly through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
Spread is more likely when people are in close contact with one another (within about 6 feet).
COVID-19 seems to be spreading easily and sustainably in the community (community spread) in many affected geographic areas.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
It is not yet known whether weather and temperature affect the spread of COVID-19.
Some other viruses, like those that cause the common cold and flu, spread more during cold weather months but that does not mean it is impossible to become sick with these viruses during other months.
There is much more to learn about the transmissibility, severity, and other features associated with COVID-19 and investigations are ongoing.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Each health department determines community spread differently based on local conditions.
For information on community spread in your area, please visit your health departments website.​
At this time, CDC has no data to suggest that this new coronavirus or other similar coronaviruses are spread by mosquitoes or ticks.
The main way that COVID-19 spreads is from person to person.
See How Coronavirus Spreads for more information.
Visit the How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others page to learn about how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19.
Wear masks in public settings when around people not living in your household and particularly where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, such as grocery stores, pharmacies, and gas stations.
Masks may slow the spread of the virus and help people who may have the virus and do not know it from transmitting it to others.
COVID-19 can be spread by people who do not have symptoms and do not know that they are infected.
Thats why its important for everyone to practice social distancing (staying at least 6 feet away from other people) and wear masks in public settings.
Masks provide an extra layer to help prevent the respiratory droplets from traveling in the air and onto other people.
The masks recommended are not surgical masks or N-95 respirators.
Those are critical supplies that must continue to be reserved for healthcare workers and other medical first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
More information about masks can be found on our masks site.
For more information, see Groups at Higher Risk for Severe Illness.
There is still a lot that is unknown about COVID-19 and how it spreads.
Coronaviruses are thought to be spread most often by respiratory droplets.
Although the virus can survive for a short period on some surfaces, it is unlikely to be spread from domestic or international mail, products or packaging.
However, it may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Learn more about safe handling of deliveries and mail.
In healthcare settings across the United States, donated blood is a lifesaving, essential part of caring for patients.
The need for donated blood is constant, and blood centers are open and in urgent need of donations.
CDC encourages people who are well to continue to donate blood if they are able, even if they are practicing social distancing because of COVID-19.
CDC is supporting blood centers by providing recommendations that will keep donors and staff safe.
Examples of these recommendations include spacing donor chairs 6 feet apart, thoroughly adhering to environmental cleaning practices, and encouraging donors to make donation appointments ahead of time.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Handwashing is one of the best ways to protect yourself and your family from getting sick.
Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing; going to the bathroom; and before eating or preparing food.
If soap and water are not readily available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces such as tables, doorknobs, light switches, countertops, handles, desks, phones, keyboards, toilets, faucets, and sinks.
If surfaces are dirty, clean them using detergent or soap and water prior to disinfection.
To disinfect, most common EPA-registered household disinfectants will work.
See CDCs recommendations for household cleaning and disinfection.
Most people who get COVID-19 will be able to recover at home.
CDC has directions for people who are recovering at home and their caregivers, including:
However, some people may need emergency medical attention.
Watch for symptoms and learn when to seek emergency medical attention.
When to Seek Emergency Medical Attention
Look for emergency warning signs* for COVID-19.
If someone is showing any of these signs, seek emergency medical care immediately
*This list is not all possible symptoms.
Please call your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 or call ahead to your local emergency facility: Notify the operator that you are seeking care for someone who has or may have COVID-19.
Based on available evidence, children do not appear to be at higher risk for COVID-19 than adults.
While some children and infants have been sick with COVID-19, adults make up most of the known cases to date.
However, a few children have developed multisystem inflammatory syndrome (MIS-C).
Currently, information about this syndrome is limited.
CDC is working with state and local health departments to learn more about MIS-C.
You can encourage your child to help stop the spread of COVID-19 by teaching them to do the same things everyone should do to stay healthy.
You can find additional information on preventing COVID-19 at How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others.
More information on Keeping Children Healthy during the COVID-19 Outbreak is available online.
No.
The symptoms of COVID-19 are similar in children and adults.
COVID-19 can look different in different people.
For many people, being sick with COVID-19 would be a little bit like having the flu.
People can get a fever, cough, or have a hard time taking deep breaths.
Most people who have gotten COVID-19 have not gotten very sick.
Only a small group of people who get it have had more serious problems.
CDC and partners are investigating cases of multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) associated with COVID-19.
Learn more about COVID-19 and multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C).
CDC recommends that everyone 2 years and older wear a mask that covers their nose and mouth in public settings when around people not living in your household, particularly where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain.
Masks should NOT be put on babies or children younger than 2 because of the danger of suffocation.
Children younger than 2 years of age are listed as an exception as well as anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Outbreaks can be stressful for adults and children.
When you talk with your child, try to stay calm, and reassure them that they are safe.
Talk to your children about COVID-19 and help them cope with stress.
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) is a condition where different body parts can become inflamed, including the heart, lungs, kidneys, brain, skin, eyes, or gastrointestinal organs.
We do not yet know what causes MIS-C.
However, we know that many children with MIS-C had the virus that causes COVID-19, or had been around someone with COVID-19.
MIS-C can be serious, even deadly, but most children who were diagnosed with this condition have gotten better with medical care.
Contact your childs doctor, nurse, or clinic right away if your child is showing symptoms of MIS-C. Seek emergency care right away if your child is showing any of these emergency warning signs of MIS-C or other concerning signs.
The key to slowing the spread of COVID-19 is to practice social distancing.
While school is out, children should not have in-person playdates with children from other households.
If children are playing outside their own homes, it is essential that they remain 6 feet from anyone who is not in their own household.
Some children with certain underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Make sure children practice everyday preventive behaviors, such as washing their hands often with soap and water.
Remember, if children meet outside of school in groups, it can put everyone at risk.
For more information, see Help Stop the Spread of COVID-19 in Children.
For more information, see Help Children Learn at Home.
Check with your school on plans to continue meal services during the school dismissal.
Many schools are keeping school facilities open to allow families to pick up meals or are providing grab-and-go meals at a central location.
For more information, see Keep Children Healthy during the COVID-19 Outbreak.
Older adults and people who have serious underlying medical conditions are at highest risk of getting sick from COVID-19.
Its not known yet whether all children with underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Although most COVID-19 cases in children are not severe, serious illness that needs to be treated at the hospital still happens.
Some data on children reported that the majority who needed hospitalization for COVID-19 had at least one underlying medical condition.
The most common underlying conditions reported among children with COVID-19 include chronic lung disease (including asthma), heart disease, and conditions that weaken the immune system.
This information suggests that children with these underlying medical conditions may be at risk for more severe illness from COVID-19.
More data are needed to learn which underlying or complex medical conditions may put children at increased risk.
CDC is monitoring new information as it becomes available and will provide updates as needed.
Learn more about caring for children with special health care needs during a disaster and people who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
In addition to following the recommendations to prevent getting sick and running essential errands, families should take extra steps recommended for persons with higher risk of severe COVID-19 illness and steps outlined for those with potential COVID-19 exposure or confirmed illness.
Helping children understand and follow recommendations, like social distancing and wearing masks, can be challenging if your child has intellectual disabilities, sensory issues, or other special healthcare needs.
Supporting children with special healthcare needs can put additional demands and stress on families, especially during emergency situations.
You have likely found ways to manage the stress and challenges unique to your familys situation.
It is important to continue your familys coping methods, including reaching out to other family members, friends, support groups, and organizations that have been helpful in the past.
See information on helping children cope and coping with stress (such as visiting parks, trails, or open spaces) and making your family stronger.
If you, or someone you care about, are feeling overwhelmed with emotions like sadness, depression, or anxiety, or feel like you want to harm yourself or others:
If your child with special healthcare needs becomes sick with symptoms of COVID-19, contact your childs healthcare provider.
If your child has new or worsening emergency warning signs, such as trouble breathing, pain or pressure in the chest, confusion or inability to wake them up, or bluish lips or face, call 911.
If you think your child may have COVID-19, notify the operator so that first responders may be appropriately prepared to protect themselves and others.
Notify your childs healthcare provider if someone else in your house becomes sick with COVID-19, so they can provide any advice specific for your child.
See additional information if someone in the home is sick with COVID-19 or suspected of having COVID-19.
If your childs healthcare provider tells you to go to the hospital for any health problem, including COVID-19
Create a household plan of action to help protect your health and the health of those you care about in the event of an outbreak of COVID-19 in your community:
Plan for potential changes at your workplace.
Talk to your employer about their emergency operations plan, including sick-leave policies and telework options.
Learn how businesses and employers can plan for and respond to COVID-19.
CDC does not encourage the production and use of homemade hand sanitizer products because of concerns over the correct use of the ingredientsexternal icon and the need to work under sterile conditions to make the product.
Local industries that are looking into producing hand sanitizer to fill in for commercial shortages can refer to the World Health Organization guidance.pdf iconexternal icon Organizations should revert to the use of commercially produced, FDA-approved product once such supplies again become available.
People with COVID-19 have reported a wide range of symptoms – from mild symptoms to severe illness.
Symptoms may appear 2-14 days after exposure to the virus.
If you have fever, cough, or other symptoms, you might have COVID-19.
Look for emergency warning signs* for COVID-19.
If someone is showing any of these signs, seek emergency medical care immediately
*This list is not all possible symptoms.
Please call your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 or call ahead to your local emergency facility: Notify the operator that you are seeking care for someone who has or may have COVID-19.
Yes.
It is possible to test positive for flu (as well as other respiratory infections) and COVID-19 at the same time.
Maybe; not everyone needs to be tested for COVID-19.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and want to get tested, call your healthcare provider first.
Most people will have mild illness and can recover at home without medical care and may not need to be tested.
CDC has guidance for who should be tested, but decisions about testing are made by state and local health departments and healthcare providers.
You can also visit your state or local health departments website to look for the latest local information on testing.
Decisions about testing are made by state and localexternal icon health departments or healthcare providers.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and are not tested, it is important to stay home.
What to do if you are sick.
COVID-19 testing differs by location.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and want to get tested, call your healthcare provider first.
You can also visit your state or localexternal icon health departments website to look for the latest local information on testing.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized viral tests that let you collect either a nasal swabexternal icon or a saliva sampleexternal icon at home.
However, you will still need to send your sample to a laboratory for analysis.
If you test positive for COVID-19, know what protective steps to take if you are sick or caring for someone.
If you test negative for COVID-19, you probably were not infected at the time your sample was collected.
However, that does not mean you will not get sick.
The test result only means that you did not have COVID-19 at the time of testing.
You might test negative if the sample was collected early in your infection and test positive later during your illness.
You could also be exposed to COVID-19 after the test and get infected then.
This means you could still spread the virus.
If you develop symptoms later, you might need another test to determine if you are infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.
For more information about viral tests, please visit Test for Current Infection.
Antibody tests for COVID-19 are available through healthcare providers and laboratories.
Check with your healthcare provider to see if they offer antibody tests and whether you should get one.
A positive test result shows you might have antibodies from an infection with the virus that causes COVID-19.
However, there is a chance a positive result means that you have antibodies from an infection with a virus from the same family of viruses (called coronaviruses), such as the one that causes the common cold.
Having antibodies to the virus that causes COVID-19 might provide protection from getting infected with the virus again.
If it does, we do not know how much protection the antibodies might provide or how long this protection might last.
You should continue to protect yourself and others since you could get infected with the virus again.
If you test negative, you might not have ever had COVID-19.
Talk with your healthcare provider about your test result and the type of test you took to understand what your result means.
Regardless of whether you test positive or negative, the results do not confirm whether or not you are able to spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
Until we know more, continue to take steps to protect yourself and others.
If you want more information about antibody tests, see Test for Past Infection.
Yes, it is possible.
You may test negative if the sample was collected early in your infection and test positive later during this illness.
You could also be exposed to COVID-19 after the test and get infected then.
Even if you test negative, you still should take steps to protect yourself and others.
See Testing for Current Infection for more information.
COVID-19 is a new disease and there is limited information regarding risk factors for severe disease.
Based on currently available information and clinical expertise, older adults and people with underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
If you are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19, you should:
Most people with disabilities are not inherently at higher risk for becoming infected with or having severe illness from COVID-19.
Some people with physical limitations or other disabilities might be at a higher risk of infection because of their underlying medical condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Contact tracing has been used for decades by state and local health departments to slow or stop the spread of infectious diseases.
Contact tracing slows the spread of COVID-19 by
During contact tracing, the health department staff will not ask you for
Discussions with health department staff are confidential.
This means that your personal and medical information will be kept private and only shared with those who may need to know, like your health care provider.
If you have been diagnosed with COVID-19, your name will not be shared with those you came in contact with.
The health department will only notify people you were in close contact with (within 6 feet for more than 15 minutes) that they might have been exposed to COVID-19.
Each state and jurisdiction use their own method for collecting and protecting health information.
To learn more, contact your state or local health department.
You may also be interested in: If I participate contact tracing for COVID-19 using a digital tool, is my personal health information secure?
For COVID-19, a close contact is anyone who was within 6 feet of an infected person for at least 15 minutes.
An infected person can spread COVID-19 starting 48 hours (or 2 days) before the person had any symptoms or tested positive for COVID-19.
Yes, you are still considered a close contact even if you were wearing a mask while you were around someone with COVID-19.
Masks are meant to protect other people in case you are infected, and not to protect you from becoming infected.
If you have been around someone who is sick with COVID-19, local authorities, the health department, or your doctor may recommend that you get tested for COVID-19.
The health department may be able to provide resources for testing in your area.
If you are diagnosed with COVID-19, someone from the health department may call you to check on your health, discuss who you have been around, and ask where you spent time while you may have been able to spread COVID-19 to others.
You will also be asked to continue to stay at home and self-isolate, away from others.
Watch for or monitor your symptoms of COVID-19.
If your symptoms worsen or become severe, you should seek medical care.
If you were around someone who has been diagnosed with COVID-19, someone from the health department may call you to let you know that you may have been exposed to COVID-19.
Stay home away from others for 14 days (self-quarantine) after your last contact with that person.
Health department staff will help identify the dates for your self-quarantine.
Health department staff can also provide resources for COVID-19 testing in your area.
Monitor your health and watch for symptoms of COVID-19.
Remember, symptoms may appear 2-14 days after you were exposed to COVID-19.
Tell the health department if you develop any symptoms.
Tell people you were around recently if you become ill, so they can monitor their health.
If your symptoms worsen or become severe, seek medical care.
Severe symptoms include trouble breathing, persistent pain or pressure in the chest, new confusion, inability to wake or stay awake, or bluish lips or face.
The health department staff will not ask you for
Yes.
You should still self-quarantine for 14 days since your last exposure.
It can take up to 14 days after exposure to the virus for a person to develop COVID-19 symptoms.
A negative result before end of the 14-day quarantine period does not rule out possible infection.
By self-quarantining for 14 days, you lower the chance of possibly exposing others to COVID-19.
People with COVID-19 can still spread the virus even if they dont have any symptoms.
If you were around someone who had COVID-19, it is critical that you stay home and away from others for 14 days from the last day that you were around that person.
Staying home and away from others at all times helps your health department in the fight against COVID-19 and helps protect you, your family, and your community.
If you have been around someone who was identified as a close contact to a person with COVID-19, closely monitor yourself for any symptoms of COVID-19.
You do not need to self-quarantine unless you develop symptoms or if the person identified as a close contact develops COVID-19.
No, there will not be a national app for contact tracing.
There are many options available now, and it is up to each state and individual to decide which tools best fit their needs.
Yes, if you agree to participate in contact tracing for COVID-19 with the health department, your information is secure.
Discussions with health department staff are confidential.
This means that your personal and medical information will be kept private and only shared with those who may need to know, like your health care provider.
Your name will not be shared with those you came in contact with.
If you have been diagnosed with COVID-19, the health department will only notify people you were in close contact with (within 6 feet for more than 15 minutes) that they might have been exposed to COVID-19.
Health departments may use case management tools to help make the contact tracing process more efficient.
If you choose to provide information through one of these tools, your information is secure and stored with the health department.
These tools also help health departments quickly receive and analyze information about COVID-19.
Case management tools are under the same laws and regulations for all sensitive health information use (e.g.
HIPPA).
You must provide consent for the health department to collect information using a case management tool.
Just like traditional contact tracing, digital tools will not collect information regarding money, Social Security numbers, bank account information, salary information, or credit card numbers.
Exposure notification tools may be an app that you can download on your personal cell phone.
If you choose to download an exposure notification app for COVID-19, your information is secure.
Exposure notification apps are developed in collaboration with or endorsed by health departments.
These apps undergo rigorous testing to determine their trustworthiness, security, and ability to protect peoples privacy.
Until you give consent to share information with your local health department, any information you have entered into the app is stored only on your personal phone.
Your information is stored only on your own phone and is not sent to the health department or any other third party.
The app and your information can be deleted any time.
When you consent to share your information with the local health department, your information is secure.
No, you are not required to download an app to give information for contact tracing for COVID-19.
Health departments commonly use case management tools to make the contact tracing process more efficient.
These types of tools are not downloaded on personal cell phones.
If you choose to give information to your local or state health department for contact tracing for COVID-19, you do not need to download an app on your cell phone.
The health department staff may call you to
It is up to you to decide if you download an exposure notification app for COVID-19.
There is currently no known risk associated with being in the same room at a funeral or visitation service with the body of someone who died of COVID-19.
See How to Protect Yourself &amp; Others to learn how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19, if you decide to attend a funeral or visitation.
COVID-19 is a new disease and we are still learning how it spreads.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
This type of spread is not a concern after death.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
This is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
People should consider not touching the body of someone who has died of COVID-19.
Older people and people of all ages with severe underlying health conditions are at higher risk of severe illness from COVID-19.
There may be less of a chance of the virus spreading from certain types of touching, such as holding the hand or hugging after the body has been prepared for viewing.
Other activities, such as kissing, washing, and shrouding should be avoided before, during, and after the body has been prepared, if possible.
If washing the body or shrouding are important religious or cultural practices, families are encouraged to work with their communitys cultural and religious leaders and funeral home staff on how to reduce their exposure as much as possible.
At a minimum, people conducting these activities should wear disposable gloves.
If splashing of fluids is expected, additional personal protective equipment (PPE) may be required (such as disposable gown, face shield, or goggles and N-95 respirator).
If desired, you may retrieve the belongings of a loved one who has died of COVID-19 outside their home (for example, in a hospital setting).
Depending on local rules and regulations, family members may retrieve these belongings at the funeral home or the healthcare facility.
You should use gloves and practice good hand hygiene when handling your loved ones belongings.
Depending on the type of belongings, such as electronics, you should also follow the household item-specific cleaning and disinfection guidelines when handling these items.
When a US citizen dies outside the United States, the deceased persons next of kin or legal representative should notify US consular officials at the Department of State.
Consular personnel are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, to provide assistance to US citizens for overseas emergencies.
If a family member, domestic partner, or legal representative is in a different country from the deceased person, he or she should call the Department of States Office of Overseas Citizens Services in Washington, DC, from 8 am to 5 pm Eastern time, Monday through Friday, at 888-407-4747 (toll-free) or 202-501-4444.
For emergency assistance after working hours or on weekends and holidays, call the Department of State switchboard at 202-647-4000 and ask to speak with the Overseas Citizens Services duty officer.
In addition, the US embassyexternal iconexternal iconexternal icon closest to or in the country where the US citizen died can provide assistance.
CDC does not require an autopsy before the remains of a person who died overseas are returned to the United States.
Depending on the circumstances surrounding the death, some countries may require an autopsy.
Sources of support to the family include the local consulate or embassy, travel insurance provider, tour operator, faith-based and aid organizations, and the deceaseds employer.
There likely will need to be an official identification of the body and official documents issued by the consular office.
CDC requirements for importing human remains depend upon if the body has been embalmed, cremated, or if the person died from a quarantinable communicable disease.
At this time, COVID-19 is a quarantinable communicable disease in the United States and the remains must meet the standards for importation found in 42 Code of Federal Regulations Part 71.55 and may be cleared, released, and authorized for entry into the United States only under the following conditions:
Please see CDCs guidance for additional information.
Cleaning with soap and water removes germs, dirt, and impurities from surfaces.
It lowers the risk of spreading infection.
Disinfecting kills germs on surfaces.
By killing germs on a surface after cleaning, it can further lower the risk of spreading infection.
The risk of transmitting or spreading SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, during vacuuming is unknown.
In order to reduce the need for cleaning, disinfection, and vacuuming, consider removing area rugs completely, if possible.
At this time, there are no reported cases of COVID-19 associated with vacuuming.
If vacuuming is necessary or required in a school, business, or community facility that was used by a person with suspected or confirmed COVID-19, first follow the CDC recommendations for Cleaning and Disinfection for Community Facilities that apply, which includes a wait time of 24 hours, or as long as practical.
After cleaning and disinfection, the following recommendations may help reduce the risk to workers and other individuals when vacuuming:
Routine cleaning is the everyday cleaning practices that businesses and communities normally use to maintain a healthy environment.
Surfaces frequently touched by multiple people, such as door handles, bathroom surfaces, and handrails, should be cleaned with soap and water or another detergent at least daily when facilities are in use.
More frequent cleaning and disinfection may be required based on level of use.
For example, certain surfaces and objects in public spaces, such as shopping carts and point of sale keypads, should be cleaned and disinfected before each use.
Cleaning removes dirt and impurities, including germs, from surfaces.
Cleaning alone does not kill germs, but it reduces the number of germs on a surface.
Cleaning does not kill germs, but by removing them, it lowers their numbers and the risk of spreading infection.
If a surface may have gotten the virus on it from a person with or suspected to have COVID-19, the surface should be cleaned and disinfected.
Disinfecting kills germs on surfaces.
Regular cleaning staff can clean and disinfect community spaces.
Cleaning staff should be trained on appropriate use of cleaning and disinfection chemicals and provided with the personal protective equipment (PPE) required for the chemicals used.
Companies do not necessarily need to close after a person with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 has been in a company facility.
The area(s) used or visited by the ill person should be closed for 24 hours or as long as possible.
Open outside doors and windows as much as possible ensuring that doing so does not pose a safety risk to children using the facility (i.e.
make sure that children are not able to enter the closed off area through any windows or doors).
and use ventilating fans to increase air circulation in the area.
Once the area has been appropriately disinfected, it can be opened for use.
Workers without close contact with the person with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 can return to work immediately after disinfection is completed.
The efficacy of these disinfection methods against the virus that causes COVID-19 is not known.
EPA only recommends use of the surface disinfectants identified on List Nexternal icon against the virus that causes COVID-19.
EPA does not routinely review the safety or efficacy of pesticidal devices, such as UV lights, LED lights, or ultrasonic devices.
Therefore, EPA cannot confirm whether, or under what circumstances, such products might be effective against the spread of COVID-19.
Outdoor areas generally require normal routine cleaning and do not require disinfection.
Spraying disinfectant on outdoor playgrounds is not an efficient use of disinfectant supplies and has not been proven to reduce the risk of COVID-19 to the public.
You should maintain existing cleaning and hygiene practices for outdoor areas.
If practical, high touch surfaces made of plastic or metal, such as grab bars and railings, should be cleaned routinely.
Cleaning and disinfection of wooden surfaces (e.g play structures, benches, tables) or groundcovers (e.g mulch, sand) is not recommended.
CDC does not recommend the use of sanitizing tunnels.
There is no evidence that they are effective in reducing the spread of COVID-19.
Chemicals used in sanitizing tunnels could cause skin, eye, or respiratory irritation or damage.
CDC does not recommend disinfection of sidewalks or roads.
Spraying disinfectant on sidewalks and roads is not an efficient use of disinfectant supplies and has not been proven to reduce the risk of COVID-19 to the public.
The risk of spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 from these surfaces is very low and disinfection is not effective on these surfaces.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
See If You Have Pets for more information about pets and COVID-19.
However, since animals can spread other diseases to people, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, such as washing your hands and maintaining good hygiene.
For more information on the many benefits of pet ownership, as well as staying safe and healthy around animals including pets, livestock, and wildlife, visit CDCs Healthy Pets, Healthy People website.
Although we know certain bacteria and fungi can be carried on fur and hair, there is no evidence that viruses, including the virus that causes COVID-19, can spread to people from the skin, fur, or hair of pets.
However, because animals can sometimes carry other germs that can make people sick, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, including washing hands before and after interacting with them.
Dog parks provide socialization and exercise for dogs, which is an important part of their wellbeing.
Because there is a risk that people with COVID-19 could spread it to animals, CDC recommends that you do not let pets interact with people outside of your household, especially in places with community spread of COVID-19.
Therefore, you should consider avoiding dog parks or other places where large numbers of people and dogs gather.
Some areas are allowing dog parks to open.
If you choose to go to a dog park, follow local guidelines.
There are ways to reduce the risk of you or your dog getting infected with COVID-19 if you go to a dog park.
See more information on pets and COVID-19 and recommendations for how to help keep your pet safe.
Until we know more about how this virus affects animals, CDC encourages pet owners to treat pets as you would other human family members to protect them from possible infection.
This means limiting contact between your pets and people outside your household as much as possible and avoiding places where large numbers of people gather.
Some areas are allowing groomers and boarding facilities such as dog daycares to open.
If you must take your pet to a groomer or boarding facility, follow any protocols put into place at the facility, such as wearing a mask and maintaining at least 6 feet of space between yourself and others if possible.
Limit pet items brought from home to the groomer or boarding facility, and disinfect any objects that are taken into a facility and returned home (such as leashes, bowls, and toys).
Use an EPA-registered disinfectantexternal icon to clean items and rinse thoroughly with clean water afterwards.
Do not wipe or bathe your pet with chemical disinfectants, alcohol, hydrogen peroxide, or other products, such as hand sanitizer, counter-cleaning wipes, or other industrial or surface cleaners.
If you have questions about appropriate products for bathing or cleaning your pet, talk to your veterinarian.
Do not put masks on pets, and do not take a sick pet to a groomer or boarding facility.
Signs of sickness in dogs may include fever, coughing, difficulty breathing or shortness of breath, lethargy, sneezing, discharge from the nose or eyes, vomiting, or diarrhea.
If you think your pet is sick, call your veterinarian.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
See more information on pets and COVID-19 and recommendations for how to help keep your pet safe.
Most pets that have gotten sick from the virus that causes COVID-19 were infected after close contact with a person with COVID-19.
Talk to your veterinarian about any health concerns you have about your pets.
If your pet gets sick after contact with a person with COVID-19, call your veterinarian and let them know the pet was around a person with COVID-19.
If you are sick with COVID-19, do not take your pet to the veterinary clinic yourself.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
Routine testing of animals for COVID-19 is not recommended at this time.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
However, it appears that the virus that causes COVID-19 can spread from people to animals after close contact with people with COVID-19.
Until we learn more about how this virus affects animals, use similar precautions for pets and other animals in your facility as you would for other people in your facility.
This will help protect both people and pets in your facility from COVID-19.
Talk to a veterinarian if a pet in your facility gets sick or if you have any concerns about the health of any pets in the facility.
If you think a pet in the facility was exposed to or is showing signs consistent with COVID-19, contact your state health official to discuss guidance on testing pets or other animals for the virus that causes COVID-19.
People who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 should avoid providing care for sick pets, if possible.
For more information, visit CDCs If You Have Pets webpage.
CDC does not have any evidence to suggest that imported animals or animal products pose a risk for spreading COVID-19 in the United States.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
CDC, the U. S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) play distinct but complementary roles in regulating the importation of live animals and animal products into the United States.
Please refer to CDCs requirements for bringing a dog to the United States.
The current requirements for rabies vaccination apply to dogs imported from high-risk countries for rabies.
Imported animals will need to meet CDC and USDAsexternal iconexternal icon requirements for entering the United States.
At this time, there is no evidence that companion animals, including pets and service animals, can spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
As with any animal introduced to a new environment, animals recently imported should be observed daily for signs of illness.
If an animal becomes ill, the animal should be examined by a veterinarian.
Call your local veterinary clinic before bringing the animal into the clinic and let them know that the animal was recently imported from another country.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
Currently, there is no evidence to suggest the virus that causes COVID-19 is circulating in free-living wildlife in the United States, or that wildlife might be a source of infection for people in the United States.
If a wild animal were to become infected with the virus, we dont know whether the infection could then spread among wildlife or if it could spread to other animals, including pets.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals, including wildlife, could be affected by COVID-19.
Because wildlife can carry other diseases, even without looking sick, it is always important to enjoy wildlife from a distance.
Take steps to prevent getting sick from wildlife in the United States:
See COVID-19 and Animals for more information.
Other coronaviruses have been found in North American bats in the past, but there is currently no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 is present in any free-living wildlife in the United States, including bats.
In general, coronaviruses do not cause illness or death in bats, but we dont yet know if this new coronavirus would make North American species of bats sick.
Bats are an important part of natural ecosystems, and their populations are already declining in the United States.
Bat populations could be further threatened by the disease itself or by harm inflicted on bats resulting from a misconception that bats are spreading COVID-19.
However, there is no evidence that bats in the United States are a source of the virus that causes COVID-19 for people.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how bats could be affected by COVID-19.
Currently, there is no evidence that you can get infected with the virus that causes COVID-19 by eating food, including wild hunted game meat.
However, hunters can get infected with other diseases when processing or eating game.
Hunters should always practice good hygiene when processing animals by following these food safety recommendations:
You should follow your state and/or local jurisdictional guidance regarding continuing operations at your facility.
There have not been any reports of horses testing positive for the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
COVID-19 is primarily spread from person to person, so steps should be taken to reduce the risks for people visiting your facility.
For more information, see Guidance on Preparing Workplaces for COVID-19pdf iconexternal icon and Interim Guidance for Businesses and Employers to Plan and Respond to Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Community mitigation is especially important before a vaccine or drug becomes widely available.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
Individual people, communities, schools, businesses, and healthcare organizations have a role to play in community mitigation.
Policies*, which include limits on large gatherings, restrictions on businesses, and school closures are often needed to fully put in place community mitigation strategies.
Each community is unique.
Because some actions can be very disruptive to daily life, mitigation activities will be different depending on how much disease has spread within the community, what the community population is like, and the ability to take these actions at the local level.
To identify appropriate activities, all parts of a community that might be affected need to be considered, including populations most vulnerable to severe illness, and those who might be more affected socially or economically.
When selecting mitigation activities, states and communities need to consider the spread of disease locally, characteristics of the people who live in the community (for example, age groups, languages spoken, overall health status), and the kind of public health resources and healthcare systems (like hospitals) that are available in the community.
State and local officials may need to adjust community mitigation activities and immediately take steps to scale them up or down depending on the changing local situation.
Putting mitigation into practice is based on
*CDC cannot address the policies of any business or organization.
CDC shares recommendations based on the best available science to help people make decisions that improve their health and safety.
In all cases, follow the guidance of your healthcare provider and local health department.
Local decisions depend on local circumstances.
For more information, see Community Mitigation Framework.
Currently there is no evidence that people can get COVID-19 by eating or handling food.
It may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object, such as a food package or dining ware that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
There is also no current evidence that people can get COVID-19 by drinking water.
The COVID-19 virus has not been detected in drinking water.
Conventional water treatment methods that use filtration and disinfection, such as those in most municipal drinking water systems, should remove or kill the virus that causes COVID-19.​ Learn more about food and COVID-19.
The virus that causes COVID-19 has not been detected in treated drinking water.
Water treatment plants use filters and disinfectants to remove or kill germs, like the virus that causes COVID-19.
The Environmental Protection Agency regulates water treatment plants to ensure that treated water is safe to drink.
Currently, there is no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 can be spread to people by drinking treated water.
COVID-19 is spread mainly through close contact from person-to-person.
You can continue to use and drink water from your tap as usual.
The virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in the feces of some patients diagnosed with COVID-19.
However, it is unclear whether the virus found in feces may be capable of causing COVID-19.
There has not been any confirmed report of the virus spreading from feces to a person.
Scientists also do not know how much risk there is that the virus could be spread from the feces of an infected person to another person.
However, they think this risk is low based on data from previous outbreaks of diseases caused by related coronaviruses, such as severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS).
Recently, ribonucleic acid (RNA) from the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater, and no information to date that anyone has become sick with COVID-19 because of exposure to wastewater.
At this time, the risk of transmission of the virus that causes COVID-19 through properly designed and maintained sewerage systems is thought to be low.
Recently, ribonucleic acid (RNA) from the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater, and no information to date that anyone has become sick with COVID-19 because of exposure to wastewater.
Standard practices associated with wastewater treatment plant operations should be sufficient to protect wastewater workers from the virus that causes COVID-19.
These standard practices can include engineering and administrative controls, hygiene precautions, specific safe work practices, and personal protective equipment (PPE) normally required when handling untreated wastewater.
No additional COVID-19–specific protections are recommended for workers involved in wastewater management, including those at wastewater treatment facilities.
See Information for Wastewater and Sanitation System Workers on COVID-19 for additional information.
In most cases, it is safe to wash your hands with soap and tap water during a Boil Water Advisory.
Follow the guidance from your local public health officials.
If soap and water are not available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in pools, hot tubs, or water playgrounds.
Plus, proper operation of public pools, hot tubs, and water playgrounds (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) and disinfection of the water (with chlorine or bromine) should inactivate the virus.
The virus mainly spreads when respiratory droplets from infected people land in the mouths or noses of others or possibly when inhaled into the lungs by others.
If a public pool, hot tub, or water playground is open, it is important for all visitors and staff to take steps to slow the spread of the virus:
See Considerations for Public Pools, Hot Tubs, and Water Playgrounds for more information.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in pools, including saltwater pools.
Plus, proper operation of public pools (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) and disinfection of the water (with chlorine or bromine) should inactivate the virus.
Saltwater pools are chlorinated pools.
In traditional pools, chlorine products (such as granules or liquid bleach) are added to the water to disinfect it.
In saltwater pools, table salt (made up of sodium and chloride) is added to the water, and an electrical current is then run through the water with dissolved salt.
This creates the same disinfecting form of chlorine that is created when chlorine products are added to the water in traditional pools.
CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading to people through the water in lakes, oceans, rivers, or other natural bodies of water.
The virus mainly spreads when respiratory droplets from infected people land in the mouths or noses of others or possibly when inhaled into the lungs by others.
If a public beach or other swim area in a natural body of water is open, it is important for all visitors and staff to take steps to slow the spread of the virus:
See Considerations for Public Beaches for more information.
RNAexternal icon of the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater, which can come from combined sewer overflowsexternal icon (rainwater runoff, domestic sewage, and industrial wastewater) and other sourcesexternal icon (such as, leaking septic tanks or animal waste from farms nearby) and enter swim areas.
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in wastewater.
Plus, CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus being spread by swallowing or coming in contact with water contaminated by feces (poop) from an infected person.
At lakes, oceans, and rivers with routine water quality monitoring programs, staff look for changes in fecal (poop) contamination of the water.
Water quality advisories and beach closures alert the public to avoid getting in or on the water because of increased fecal contamination.
Learn more about healthy swimming in natural bodies of water and access water quality information by state.
No, do NOT wear a cloth mask in the water.
It can be difficult to breathe through a cloth mask when it is wet.
Plus, wet cloth masks dont slow the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19 as well as dry cloth masks.
All of this means it is particularly important to stay at least 6 feet apart in the water from people you dont live with.
In case cloth masks do get wet by mistake, bring a second (or extra) cloth mask for everyone heading out to the public pool or beach.
CDC does not yet have evidence on the effectiveness of different types of cloth materials.
Wearing cloth masks can help prevent people infected with the virus that causes COVID-19 from spreading the virus.
Make sure your cloth mask:
Cloth masks should NOT be worn by children less than 2 years old or anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Learn more about how to wear, take off, and wash your cloth masks.
The design of the public pool, hot tub, or water playground and surrounding deck and if visitors live together or not will affect how many people can stay at least 6 feet apart from those they dont live with.
CDC recommends operators of public pools, hot tubs, and water playgrounds:
Operators might want to limit the number of people in and around the water so if the water needs to be evacuated (because of lightning or other health or safety threat) social distancing can be maintained on the deck.
Otherwise, if the water is evacuated and social distancing cannot be maintained on the deck, close the deck to visitors.
There is no standard formula to determine how many people can maintain social distancing in the water and on the surrounding deck.
See Considerations for Public Pools, Hot Tubs, and Water Playgrounds for more information.
No.
Only List N disinfectants approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agencyexternal icon should be used to disinfect surfaces (such as handrails and in bathrooms) and shared objects (such as kickboards and pool noodles).
The list includes hundreds of disinfectants.
Operators of public pools, hot tubs, or water playgrounds (such as at an apartment complex or owned by a community) should consult with the design company or engineer to determine which disinfectants are best suited for surfaces and with manufacturers to determine which disinfectants are best suited for shared objects.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectants.
We dont know yet.
Early scientific data suggest that SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, can be inactivated by the suns UV light.
However, the ability of the suns UV light to inactivate the virus on surfaces (such as handrails and in bathrooms) and shared objects (such as kickboards and pool noodles) needs more research.
Factors — such as cloudiness, latitude (distance from equator), time of day, and amount of time exposed to the suns UV light — will determine how effectively the virus is inactivated.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectantsexternal icon.
The more frequently a surface is touched by multiple people, the more frequently it should be cleaned and then disinfected with a List N disinfectant approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agencyexternal icon.
Frequently touched surfaces should be cleaned and disinfected at least daily.
Remember to clean surfaces and shared objects before disinfecting them and to follow directions on labels of cleaning products and disinfectants.
No.
RNAexternal icon of the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in feces (poop).
While data are limited, there is little evidence of infectious virus in feces.
Plus, CDC is not aware of any scientific reports of the virus being spread by swallowing or coming in contact with water contaminated by feces from an infected person.
As a result, CDC has not changed its fecal incident response recommendations.
Remember, do NOT vacuum feces out of the water.
Not when lifeguards are actively lifeguarding.
Lifeguards actively lifeguarding should not be doing other tasks that could distract them.
Drowning deaths have resulted, at least in part, from lifeguards being distracted.
Drowning can occur quickly and quietly.
Learn and take steps to prevent drowning.
Lifeguard trainers can consider the following steps to slow the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19:
CDC has more COVID-19–related considerations for public pools and public beaches and non-COVID-19–related healthy and safe swimming resources.
Help control the spread of rumors and be aware of fraud schemes.
1Fever may be subjective or confirmed
2Close contact is defined as—
a) being within approximately 6 feet (2 meters) of a COVID-19 case for a prolonged period of time; close contact can occur while caring for, living with, visiting, or sharing a health care waiting area or room with a COVID-19 case
b) having direct contact with infectious secretions of a COVID-19 case (e.g being coughed on)
If such contact occurs while not wearing recommended personal protective equipment or PPE (e.g gowns, gloves, NIOSH-certified disposable N95 respirator, eye protection), criteria for PUI consideration are met
See CDCs updated Interim Healthcare Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Persons Under Investigation for 2019 Novel Coronavirus.
Data to inform the definition of close contact are limited.
Considerations when assessing close contact include the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk) and the clinical symptoms of the person with COVID-19 (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk as does exposure to a severely ill patient).
Special consideration should be given to those exposed in health care settings.
COVID-19 can affect anyone, and the disease can cause symptoms ranging from mild to very severe.
For some other illnesses caused by respiratory viruses (such as influenza), some people may be more likely to have severe illness than others because they have characteristics or medical conditions that increase their risk.
These are commonly called risk factors.
Examples include older age or having certain underlying medical conditions.
CDC is conducting disease surveillance and field investigations to better understand why some people are more likely to develop severe COVID-19 illness.
This is one of the top priorities in CDCs strategy to combat COVID-19.
What we learn from these efforts will provide vital information to help CDC scientists and other public health officials make decisions to protect our most vulnerable populations.
CDC carries out these activities in collaboration with state, local, and territorial health departments; public health, commercial, and clinical laboratories; vital statistics offices; health care providers; emergency departments; and academic and private sector partners.
People with risk factors may be more likely to need hospitalization or intensive care if they have COVID-19, or they may be more likely to die of the infection.
It is important to learn about risk factors for severe COVID-19 illness because it can help you:
Because COVID-19 is a new disease, more work is needed to better understand the risk factors for severe illness or complications.
Potential risk factors that have been identified to date include:
Additional research will help us confirm if these are risk factors for severe COVID-19 illness and determine if there are other factors that increase a persons risk.
CDC is working to identify risk factors for severe COVID-19 illness through a variety of investigations, some of which are described below.
These investigations include adults and children and examine severe illness resulting in hospitalizations and intensive care unit (ICU) admissions.
As we continue to investigate risk factors for severe illness, we will update this webpage with new findings and new investigations.
Compare characteristics of people with COVID-19 who have symptoms with characteristics of people with COVID-19 who do not have symptoms.
How people with COVID-19 who have symptoms are different from those with COVID-19 who do not have symptoms.
How people with COVID-19 who feel more sick (for example, sick enough to need to stay in bed or to seek medical care) are different from those with COVID-19 who feel less sick.
*Investigations used include: Ongoing household investigations
Compare characteristics of people with COVID-19 who are hospitalized with characteristics of:
Characteristics associated with illness that is severe enough to require hospitalization among people with COVID-19.
*Surveillance networks and investigations used include: COVID-NET; The U.S.
Flu Vaccine Effectiveness (VE) network, New Vaccine Surveillance Network (NVSN); Hospitalized Adult Influenza Vaccine Effectiveness Network (HAIVEN); and ongoing field investigations
Compare characteristics of people with COVID-19 who are hospitalized in ICUs with characteristics of:
How people with COVID-19 who are sick enough to need ICU care are different from less sick people with COVID-19 who are hospitalized, people with COVID-19 who are not hospitalized, and the U.S. general population.
*Networks used include: Influenza Vaccine effectiveness in critically ill patients (IVY)
To protect Americans from serious infectious diseases and other health threats, public health authorities conduct national case surveillance to monitor more than 120 diseases and conditions.
For these conditions, public health collects information on individuals with the infection in a population, which is known as case surveillance.
The goal of case surveillance is to provide information necessary to control outbreaks and inform public health action.
Case surveillance is especially important for new diseases, such as COVID-19, in order to understand the similarities and differences between cases, including:
During the COVID-19 response, state and jurisdictional health departments voluntarily report to CDC using the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System.
Data about COVID-19 cases are sent to CDC without personal identifiers, such as names or home addresses.
A national standardized case definition is used to define confirmed and probable cases and deaths.
Unlike data collected for clinical trials and research studies in which scientists comprehensively measure and follow the health status of a patient, national case surveillance data focuses on capturing demographic and risk factor information about people with COVID-19.
The process for reporting, collecting, and analyzing disease data may be called a data supply chain.
Under state disease reporting laws hospitals, healthcare providers, and laboratories must report confirmed or probable COVID-19 cases and deaths to state or local health departments.
These laws allow health departments to quickly identify outbreaks and control the spread of disease.
The figure illustrates how data is transferred for case reporting (from hospitals, healthcare provider, and laboratories to local, regional, state, or territorial public health) and how data moves for case notification (from state or territorial public health to CDC).
These two steps of information flow make up national case surveillance.
While case reporting is mandatory under state reportable disease laws, case notification from state and local health departments to CDC includes deidentified data and is voluntary.
Using the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System, health departments voluntarily send CDC data that does not include personal, identifiable information about COVID-19 cases and deaths.
Because COVID-19 has been designated as a public health emergency of international concern, CDC reports national case surveillance data to the World Health Organization under International Health Regulations (2005).
CDC also publishes deidentified COVID-19 national case surveillance data with additional privacy protections for public use at data.cdc.gov.
To obtain both timely and detailed data on COVID-19 cases in the United States, CDC uses two different data sources.
The first data source is an aggregate count based on a daily, robust, multistep process to collect the data and confirm the case and death numbers with jurisdictions:
This process is collaborative, with CDC and the jurisdictions working together to ensure the accuracy of the COVID-19 case and death numbers published on the CDC website.
These aggregate counts provide the most up-to-date numbers on cases and deaths, and CDC may update the counts after posting based on any updated information from jurisdictions.
The second data source involves patient-level data for each case, which provide additional information about whether the patient died and other details such as age and race/ethnicity.
CDC receives the patient-level data, primarily from state health departments, without personal identifiers such as names or home addresses.
Because it can be time-consuming for jurisdictions to collect the additional information, these data can lag behind the aggregate counts.
Although CDC receives this information for most cases, CDC does not receive it for all cases.
National case surveillance does not provide real-time data, which can be provided by other data sources such as syndromic surveillance, a process monitoring the types of symptoms people have when they go to  emergency departments.
However, case surveillance provides information on the characteristics of a disease within a population, usually with laboratory-confirmation of cases and following a standard case definitionpdf iconexternal icon.
CDC uses national case surveillance to:
The COVID-19 pandemic has put unprecedented strain on the public health data supply chain.
In many states, the large number of COVID-19 cases has severely strained the ability of hospitals, healthcare providers, and laboratories to report cases with complete demographic information, such as race and ethnicity.
The unprecedented volume of cases has also limited the ability of state and local health departments to conduct thorough case investigations and collect all requested case data.
As a result, many COVID-19 case notifications submitted to CDC do not have complete information on patient demographics, clinical outcomes, exposures, and factors that may put people at higher risk for severe disease.
National case surveillance data are constantly changing.
For instance, as new information is gathered about previously reported cases, health departments provide updated data to CDC.
As more information and data become available, analyses might find changes in surveillance data and trends during a previously reported time window.
A key challenge with case reporting is that people who are infected with the virus that causes COVID-19 may have mild or no symptoms.
These people might not have sought testing or health care and are, therefore, less likely to have a reported case.
Similarly, cases in people who have had severe outcomes, such as hospitalizations, intensive care unit (ICU) admissions, and deaths, are more likely to be reported than cases in people with less severe illnesses.
These challenges result in limitations when analyzing and interpreting the data.
CDC continues to work with state, local, and territorial health departments to accelerate reporting of national case surveillance data, improve data quality, and gather complete information about all COVID-19 cases.
CDC is working with healthcare providers, electronic health record developers, laboratories, and state and local health departments to modernize disease surveillance by automating the generation and transmission of case reports from the electronic health record to public health agencies for review and action for the COVID-19 response.
For example, expanded use of electronic case reporting, which make the submission of information from healthcare providers to public health departments seamless and automated, will reduce the burden of manually reporting COVID-19 cases, increase timeliness of reporting, and improve data completeness by pulling data directly from the medical record.
Public health surveillance is the ongoing, systematic collection, analysis, and interpretation of health-related data essential to planning, implementation, and evaluation of public health practice.
For surveillance of COVID-19 and the virus that causes it, SARS-CoV-2, CDC is using multiple surveillance systems in collaboration with state, local, territorial, academic, and commercial partners to monitor COVID-19 in the United States.
COVID-19 surveillance draws from a combination of data sources using existing influenza and viral respiratory disease surveillance, syndromic surveillance, case reporting, lab reporting, the healthcare safety system, ongoing research platforms, and other new surveillance systems designed to answer specific questions.
The data from these systems, combined, create an updated picture of COVID-19s spread and its effects in the United States and are used to inform the U.S. national public health response to COVID-19.
COVID-19 data can be used to help public health professionals, policy makers, and health care providers monitor the spread of COVID-19 in the United States and support better understanding of illness, disease severity, effectiveness of community interventions, and social disruptions associated with COVID-19 in the U.S..
These data help inform U.S. national, state, local, tribal, and territorial public health responses to COVID-19.
Detailed and accurate data will allow us to better understand and track the size and scope of the outbreak and strengthen prevention and response efforts.
CDC provides this information on the Cases, Data, &amp; Surveillance webpage:
A COVID-19 case includes confirmed and probable cases and deaths.
This change was made to reflect an interim COVID-19 positionpdf iconexternal icon statement issued by the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists on April 5, 2020.
The position statement included a case definition and made COVID-19 a nationally notifiable disease.
A probable case or death is defined as:
The rise in the number of COVID-19 cases reflects the rapid community spread of COVID-19 in many U.S. states, territories and communities.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Also, the number of cases of COVID-19 being reported in the United States is rising due to increased laboratory testing and reporting across the country.
The COVID-19 death count shown on the Cases in the U.S. web page includes deaths reported daily by state, local, and territorial health departments.
This count reflects the most up-to-date information received by CDC based on preliminary reporting from health departments.
In contrast, provisional COVID-19 death counts from the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) are updated Monday through Friday with information collected from death certificates.
These data represent the most accurate death counts.
However, because it can take several weeks for death certificates to be submitted and processed, there is on average a delay of 1–2 weeks before they are reported.
Therefore, the provisional death counts may not include all deaths that occurred during a given time period, especially for more recent periods.
Death counts from earlier weeks are continually revised and may increase or decrease as new and updated death certificate data are received.
Provisional COVID-19 death counts may therefore differ from those on other published sources, such as media reports or the Cases in the U.S. web page.
The mortality rate is the percentage of people who died due to COVID-19 out of the total number of people with COVID-19 reported.
Since this is an ongoing outbreak, the percentage can change daily.
There are several reasons for this, such as there may be delays in reporting of additional confirmed cases of COVID-19 and not all COVID-19 cases will be detected.
CDCs overall case numbers are validated through a confirmation process with jurisdictions.
The process used for finding and confirming cases displayed by different places may differ.
Case numbers reported on other websites may differ from what is posted on CDCs website because CDCs overall case numbers are validated through a confirmation process with each jurisdiction.
Differences between reporting jurisdictions and CDCs website may occur due to the timing of reporting and website updates.
The process used for finding and confirming cases displayed by other sites may differ.
Case surveillance data are useful for tracking national trends in disease incidence (the number of new cases of a disease in a population at a certain time period).
Limitations of using case surveillance data to understand the epidemiology (who, what, where, when, how) of COVID-19 include the following:
First, case surveillance data do not represent the true burden of COVID-19 in the United States.
Many people infected with the virus that causes COVID-19 do not seek medical care or do not get tested.
The information collected might be limited if people are unavailable or unwilling to provide additional information or if medical records are unavailable for data extraction.
Second, most of the case reports captured by health departments are based on laboratory reports that usually contain limited information on the patient.
Because of the volume of cases, most health departments are not able to conduct investigations of every case to obtain additional information.
Consequently, the majority of case reports are missing data on patient demographics, symptoms, underlying health conditions, characteristics of hospitalizations such as ventilator use, and other factors such as recent travel history.
Because of missing data, analyses of these data elements are likely an underestimate of the true occurrence.
Third, it is difficult to capture asymptomatic cases through case surveillance.
People who are asymptomatic are unlikely to seek testing unless they are identified through active screening (e.g contact tracing), and investigation of symptomatic persons is prioritized.
When disease volume is high and a limited number of data elements are captured on each reported case, case surveillance data can be used to assess population burden, track the spread of the disease, monitor increases and decreases in cases in association with mitigation strategies, and study selected demographics such as age, sex, race and ethnicity, and geography.
Clinical details and other characteristics about persons with COVID-19 can be better assessed through special studies.
CDC conducts these special epidemiologic studies to better understand risk factors, such as underlying conditions and disabilities, that might put people at more risk for serious infection and studies the clinical course of illness with data on hospitalization and treatments.
New COVID-19 cases and number of deaths are recorded based on data collected and reported by state, local, and territorial health departments.
This information can be affected by local testing practices, laboratory capacity, and medical resources.
Comparing the COVID-19 situation among jurisdictions should not be based on these rates alone.
When studying the COVID-19 situation in jurisdictions, the rate of new COVID-19 cases should be combined with other data, including number of tests performed, test positivity, testing policies, excess mortality, and rates of hospital and ICU admissions.
In addition, jurisdictions vary in the completeness of certain demographic data for COVID-19 cases.
Most states have demographic factors like age and sex for the majority of reported cases.
However, in many states, the large number of COVID-19 cases has severely strained the ability to report cases with complete demographic information for race and ethnicity.
With thousands of cases being reported, completeness of these elements is unlikely to improve in the immediate future for some jurisdictions.
Because the racial and ethnic composition of the population varies by geographic area, comparisons of COVID-19 case information should consider the population of each geographic area.
In addition, because completeness of race and ethnicity information may vary by state or geographic area and by other patient factors, such as severity, case data at CDC may not be generalizable to the entire U.S. population.
CDC has worked with state and jurisdictional health departments to improve reporting of critical case surveillance data elements such as age, race and ethnicity, and death.
With thousands of cases being reported, the reporting of some data elements remains low, but state and jurisdictional health departments have continued to make improvements in completeness of data collection for COVID-19 through methods such as automated data flows.
As the epidemic changes and number of new cases goes down, CDC and our state, tribal, local, and territorial partners will continue to evaluate the most efficient means to increase the completeness and availability of actionable public health data.
Yes.
CDC is modifying existing surveillance systems to track COVID-19.
On April 3, we posted the first of what will be a weekly surveillance report called COVIDView.
The report, updated each Friday, will summarize and interpret key indicators, including information related to COVID-19 outpatient visits, emergency department visits, hospitalizations and deaths, as well as laboratory test results.
In these weekly reports, CDC provides data on hospitalization rates and patient demographics as part of its COVID-NET surveillance system.
COVID-19 surveillance data are also used to produce publications, including CDCs Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR), and to inform guidance documents to protect people from COVID-19 in a variety of settings.
CDC COVID Data Tracker is a website that allows users to interact with a variety of data on COVID-19 that is updated daily.
The website builds on other agency efforts – such as CDCs new weekly COVID-19 surveillance report, COVIDView – to capture the impact the virus is having on the United States.
CDC COVID Data Tracker presents data using visual dashboards that include interactive maps and graphs.
It is being developed in phases.
The first phase showcases data on U.S. COVID-19 cases and deaths as well as the social impacts of COVID-19.
CDC COVID Data Tracker is updated daily.
Specifics of data reporting are described as a footnote on each page.
CDC COVID Data Tracker users can track the following data daily:
CDC COVID Data Tracker displays these data using visual dashboards that include interactive maps and graphics.
The data and information provided by COVID Data Tracker will be expanded over time.
Printer friendly versionpdf icon
To ensure continuity of operations of essential functions, CDC advises that critical infrastructure workers may be permitted to continue work following potential exposure to COVID-19, provided they remain asymptomatic and additional precautions are implemented to protect them and the community.
A potential exposure means being a household contact or having close contact within 6 feet of an individual with confirmed or suspected COVID-19.
The timeframe for having contact with an individual includes the period of time of 48 hours before the individual became symptomatic.
Critical Infrastructure workers who have had an exposure but remain asymptomatic should adhere to the following practices prior to and during their work shift:
If the employee becomes sick during the day, they should be sent home immediately.
Surfaces in their workspace should be cleaned and disinfected.
Information on persons who had contact with the ill employee during the time the employee had symptoms and 2 days prior to symptoms should be compiled.
Others at the facility with close contact within 6 feet of the employee during this time would be considered exposed.
Employers should implement the recommendations in the Interim Guidance for Businesses and Employers to Plan and Respond to Coronavirus Disease 2019 to help prevent and slow the spread of COVID-19in the workplace.
This interim guidance pertains to critical infrastructure workers, including personnel in 16 different sectors of work including:
Print Versionpdf icon
Everyday Steps, Steps When Someone is Sick, and Considerations for Employers
<!--Printer friendly version &#091;3 pages&#093;-->
Always read and follow the directions on the label to ensure safe and effective use.
You should never eat, drink, breathe or inject these products into your body or apply directly to your skin as they can cause serious harm.
Do not wipe or bathe pets with these products or any other products that are not approved for animal use.
See EPAs 6 steps for Safe and Effective Disinfectant Useexternal icon
Special considerations should be made for people with asthma and they should not be present when cleaning and disinfecting is happening as this can trigger asthma exacerbations.
Learn more about reducing asthma triggers.
For soft surfaces such as carpeted floor, rugs, and drapes
Launder items (if possible) according to the manufacturers instructions.Use the warmest appropriate water setting and dry items completely.
For electronics, such as tablets, touch screens, keyboards, remote controls, and ATM machines
For clothing, towels, linens and other items
Always read and follow the directions on the label to ensure safe and effective use.
See FDAs Tips for Safe Sanitizer Useexternal icon and CDC's Hand Sanitizer Use Considerations
More details: Detailed Disinfection Guidance for Community Facilities
Interim Recommendations for U.S. Community Facilities with Suspected/Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)
There is much to learn about the novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) that causes coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Based on what is currently known about the virus and about similar coronaviruses that cause SARS and MERS, spread from person-to-person happens most frequently among close contacts (within about 6 feet).
This type of transmission occurs via respiratory droplets, but disease transmission via infectious aerosols is currently uncertain.
Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 to persons from surfaces contaminated with the virus has not been documented.
Transmission of coronavirus occurs much more commonly through respiratory droplets than through objects and surfaces, like doorknobs, countertops, keyboards, toys, etc.
Current evidence suggests that SARS-CoV-2 may remain viable for hours to days on surfaces made from a variety of materials.
Cleaning of visibly dirty surfaces followed by disinfection is a best practice measure for prevention of COVID-19 and other viral respiratory illnesses in community settings.
It is unknown how long the air inside a room occupied by someone with confirmed COVID-19 remains potentially infectious.
Facilities will need to consider factors such as the size of the room and the ventilation system design (including flowrate air changes per hour and location of supply and exhaust vents) when deciding how long to close off rooms or areas used by ill persons before beginning disinfection.
Taking measures to improve ventilation in an area or room where someone was ill or suspected to be ill with COVID-19 will help shorten the time it takes respiratory droplets to be removed from the air.
This guidance provides recommendations on the cleaning and disinfection of rooms or areas occupied by those with suspected or with confirmed COVID-19.
It is aimed at limiting the survival of SARS-CoV-2 in key environments.
These recommendations will be updated if additional information becomes available.
These guidelines are focused on community, non-healthcare facilities such as schools, institutions of higher education, offices, daycare centers, businesses, and community centers that do, and do not, house persons overnight.
These guidelines are not meant  for cleaning staff in healthcare facilities or repatriation sites, households, or for others for whom specific guidance already exists.
Timing and location of cleaning and disinfection of surfaces
Hard (non-porous) surfaces
Always read and follow the directions on the label to ensure safe and effective use.
You should never eat, drink, breathe or inject these products into your body or apply directly to your skin as they can cause serious harm.
Do not wipe or bathe pets with these products or any other products that are not approved for animal use.
See EPAs 6 steps for Safe and Effective Disinfectant Useexternal icon.
Special considerations should be made for people with asthma and they should not be present when cleaning and disinfecting is happening as this can trigger asthma exacerbations.
Learn more about reducing asthma triggers.
Always read and follow the directions on the label to ensure safe and effective use.
See FDAs Tips for Safe Sanitizer Useexternal iconexternal icon and CDC's Hand Sanitizer Use Considerations
L​inens, clothing, and other items that go in the laundry​
Interim Recommendations for U.S. Non-emergency Transport Vehicles that May Have Transported Passengers with Suspected/Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)
People who are known or suspected to have COVID-19 may use non-emergency vehicle services, such as passenger vans, accessible vans, and cars, for transportation to receive essential medical care.
When transporting a known confirmed positive passenger, it is recommended that drivers wear an N95 respirator or facemask (if a respirator is not available) and eye protection such as a face shield or goggles (as long as they do not create a driving hazard), and the passenger should wear a facemask or cloth face covering.
Occupants of these vehicles should avoid or limit close contact (within 6 feet) with others.
The use of larger vehicles such as vans is recommended when feasible to allow greater social (physical) distance between vehicle occupants.
Additionally, drivers should practice regular hand hygiene, avoid touching their nose, mouth, or eyes, and avoid picking up multiple passengers who would not otherwise be riding together on the same route.
CDC recommends that individuals wear cloth face coverings in settings where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, especially in areas with significant community transmission.
Cloth face coverings may prevent people who dont know they have the virus from transmitting it to others; these face coverings are not surgical masks, respirators, or personal protective equipment (PPE).
Cloth face coverings should not be placed on young children under age 2, anyone who has trouble breathing, or is unconscious, incapacitated or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
The following are general guidelines for cleaning and disinfecting these vehicles.
Similar guidance can be found for cleaning and disinfecting homes, community facilities, and EMS vehicles used to transport persons with suspected or confirmed COVID-19.
At a minimum, clean and disinfect commonly touched surfaces in the vehicle at the beginning and end of each shift and between transporting passengers who are visibly sick.
Ensure that cleaning and disinfection procedures are followed consistently and correctly, including the provision of adequate ventilation when chemicals are in use.
Doors and windows should remain open when cleaning the vehicle.
When cleaning and disinfecting, individuals should wear disposable gloves compatible with the products being used as well as any other PPE required according to the product manufacturers instructions.
Use of a disposable gown is also recommended, if available.
Gloves and any other disposable PPE used for cleaning and disinfecting the vehicle should be removed and disposed of after cleaning; wash hands immediately after removal of gloves and PPE with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, or use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol if soap and water are not available.
If a disposable gown was not worn, work uniforms/clothes worn during cleaning and disinfecting should be laundered afterwards using the warmest appropriate water setting and dry items completely.
Wash hands after handling laundry.
This guidance is for Institutes of Higher Education with international travel or study abroad programs.
Consider postponing or canceling student international travel programs
Given the COVID-19 pandemic, Institutes of Higher Education (IHE) should consider postponing or canceling upcoming student international travel programs.
Those overseeing student international travel programs should be aware that students may face unpredictable circumstances, such as travel restrictions, challenges returning home, and challenges accessing health care while abroad.
If IHEs choose to continue student international travel programs, they should  evaluate the risks in the host country by checking CDCs COVID-19 Travel Health Notices by Destination and The U.S. Department of States Travel advisoriesexternal icon.
They can also check with the destinations Office of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Health, and the U.S. Department of State about COVID-19-specific entry requirements, such as COVID-19 testing and quarantine.
Plan, prepare, and respond to coronavirus disease 2019
Audience: This guidance is intended for use during the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) public health emergency by federal, state, and local public health officials, respiratory protection program managers, leaders in occupational health services and industrial hygiene programs, and other leaders who are responsible for developing and implementing policies and procedures for preventing occupational exposures in non-healthcare worksites.
Purpose: This document offers strategies to conserve, extend, and respond to shortages in the supply of NIOSH-approved filtering facepiece respirators (FFRs) used in non-healthcare worksites such as manufacturing and construction.
NIOSH-approved FFRs protect users by filtering particles out of the air the user is breathing and include several classes of filters, including N95s.
The following strategies apply the principles of the hierarchy of controls and are intended to assist employers in selecting strategies to control workplace exposures during times of known supply shortages caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Strategies 1 and 2 reinforce employer requirements for the continuous evaluation and implementation of traditional hazard control practices such as elimination, substitution, engineering and administration controls.
Other strategies described herein include certain allowances such as use of FFRs beyond the manufacturer-designated shelf life to be incorporated into practice only during times of supply shortages during the COVID-19 public health emergency.
A secondary purpose is to reduce the demand for FFRs in general industry settings during the COVID-19 response so that (1) FFR manufacturers and distributors can maximize supplies to healthcare settings and (2) general industry worksites can evaluate if any excess inventories they may hold are suitable for redistributing (e.g selling, donating) to healthcare settings.
Employers should consider redistribution of excess inventories only if adequate exposure controls for their workers are implemented.
For guidance to prevent workplace exposures to acute respiratory illnesses, including COVID-19, please see CDCs Interim Guidance for Businesses and Employers.
The expanding outbreak of COVID-19 in the United States has created an overwhelming demand for personal protective equipment (PPE), including NIOSH-approved FFRs, in healthcare facilities across the country.
Additionally, the supply chains of PPE from manufacturing countries have been substantially disrupted due to local COVID-19 spread and demand.
Because of this increase in demand and decrease in supply, CDC has provided guidance to healthcare settings for strategies to optimize their supply of N95 respirators.
This guidance describes surge capacity for healthcare facilities providing care in conventional, contingency, and crisis situations.
The decisions to implement measures for healthcare facilities in contingency and crisis situations are based, in part, on the availability of N95 respirators, specifically, and other types of respirators, in general.
In recognition of the demand for FFRs in the healthcare setting and the priority to protect healthcare workers who are the workers at highest risk for COVID-19, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has issued two emergency use authorizationsexternal icon to allow FFRs not typically worn in healthcare settings to be worn.
This may reduce the availability of these FFRs for other worksites.
Users of NIOSH-approved FFRs in non-healthcare settings should develop and implement strategies to conserve and extend their current stock of respirator supplies while protecting their workers during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Employers should implement alternative controls to reduce, as much as possible, their reliance on PPE, particularly FFRs.
Conventionally, a hierarchy of controls has been used to provide feasible and effective controls to protect workers.
Multiple control strategies can be implemented concurrently and/or sequentially.
This hierarchy can be described as follows:
Employers should evaluate work tasks and processes to identify those activities or processes where the elimination or substitution of hazards may be implemented.
While the most effective at controlling hazards, these may be the most difficult to implement in existing processes, particularly during times of national or local emergencies.
Engineering controls reduce workers exposures by placing a barrier between the hazard and the worker or removing the hazard at the source.
While the initial cost of engineering controls can be higher than the cost of administrative controls or PPE, engineering controls generally provide a cost savings over the longer term and can eliminate the need for respirators if properly designed, implemented, and maintained.
Examples for consideration includes:
Administrative controls are used with existing processes to limit or prevent a hazard by changing the way people work.
Examples include:
While engineering and administrative controls should be considered first when implementing controls, PPE can be part of a suite of strategies used to protect workers.
PPE includes respirators, protective gloves, protective eyewear and face shields, and a variety of other protective gear.
PPE is frequently used with existing processes where hazards are not particularly well-controlled.
This method for protecting workers is typically less effective than other measures due to the reliance on the user to put on, use, and take off the PPE correctly and the potential for PPE breaches.
Additionally, proper use of respiratory protection requires a comprehensive program (including medical clearance, training, and fit testing) that complies with OSHAs Respiratory Protection Standardexternal icon.
In times of high demand and low supply of PPE due to the COVID-19 pandemic, non-healthcare sector employers should evaluate current work practices and control strategies to create a strategic exposure prevention and control plan to continue to protect workers.
As part of such a plan, strategies for employers to consider are prioritized below.
These measures are recommended to conserve and extend their FFR supply and to respond to shortages of manufacturer-supplied FFRs during the COVID-19 pandemic.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has also provided guidanceexternal icon on many of these measures related to their enforcement of the Respiratory Protection Standard, 29 CFR 1910.134external icon, and certain other health standards, with regard to supply shortages of disposable N95 FFRs.
Employers who successfully implement strategies for conserving and extending their FFR supplies during the COVID-19 pandemic may find that they possess excess inventories.
It is recommended that employers consider redistributing (e.g selling, donating) available excess inventories to healthcare settings during the COVID-19 pandemic to help reduce known shortages of respirators.
Worksites that are no longer active due to emergency work stoppages and restrictions are encouraged to consider redistributing their excess PPE and fit test kits to their state medical countermeasure contacts, the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)external icon, or through other appropriate channels.
Non-healthcare employers who bought large quantities of respirators in the months preceding the crisis should consider if they are willing to redistribute (e.g sell, donate) those respirators for healthcare use.
Plan, Prepare and Respond to Coronavirus Disease 2019 
Below are changes as of May 6, 2020
PDF Downloadpdf icon
This interim guidance is based on what is currently known about the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
COVID-19 is a respiratory illness that can spread from person to person.
The outbreak first started in China, but the virus continues to spread internationally and in the United States.
There is much more to learn about the transmissibility, severity, and other characteristics of COVID-19 and investigations are ongoing.
Updates are available on CDCs web page at https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/.
CDC will update this interim guidance as additional information becomes available.
This interim guidance may help prevent workplace exposures to COVID-19 in non-healthcare settings (separate guidance is available for healthcare settings).
CDC has also provided guidance for critical infrastructure workers who may have had exposure to a person known or suspected to have COVID-19.
Unless otherwise specified, this interim guidance for businesses and employers applies to critical infrastructure workplaces as well.
Businesses and employers can prevent and slow the spread of COVID-19 within the workplace.
Employers should respond in a way that takes into account the level of disease transmission in their communities and revise their business response plans as needed.
Employers should follow the White House Guidelines for Opening Up America Againexternal icon, a phased approach based on current levels of transmission and healthcare capacity at the state or local level, as part of resuming business operations.
Business operation decisions should be based on both the level of disease transmission in the community and your readiness to protect the safety and health of your employees and customers.
Businesses and employers are encouraged to coordinate with stateexternal icon and localexternal icon health officials to obtain timely and accurate information to inform appropriate responses.
Local conditions will influence the decisions that public health officials make regarding community-level strategies.
CDC has guidance for mitigation strategiespdf icon according to the level of community transmission or impact of COVID-19.
As an employer, if your business operations were interrupted, resuming normal or phased activities presents an opportunity to update your COVID-19 preparedness, response, and control plans.
All employers should implement and update as necessary a plan that:
Talk with your employees about planned changes and seek their input.
Additionally, collaborate with employees and unions to effectively communicate important COVID-19 information.
See the OSHA COVID-19 guidancepdf iconexternal icon for more information on how to protect workers from potential exposures, according to their exposure risk.
Plans should consider that employees may be able to spread COVID-19 even if they do not show symptoms.
All employers need to consider how best to decrease the spread of COVID-19 and lower the impact in your workplace.
This should include activities to:
Monitor federal, state, and local public health communications about COVID-19 regulations, guidance, and recommendations and ensure that workers have access to that information.
Frequently check the CDC COVID-19 website.
Actively encourage sick employees to stay home:
Consider conducting daily in-person or virtual health checks (e.g symptom and/or temperature screening) of employees before they enter the facility, in accordance with state and local public health authorities and, if available, your occupational health services:
Identify where and how workers might be exposed to COVID-19 at work.
Employers are responsible for providing a safe and healthy workplaceexternal icon.
Conduct a thorough hazard assessmentexternal icon of the workplace to identify potential workplace hazards related to COVID-19.
Use appropriate combinations of controls from the hierarchy of controls to limit the spread of COVID-19, including engineering controls, workplace administrative policies, and personal protective equipment (PPE) to protect workers from the identified hazards (see table below):
Take action if an employee is suspected or confirmed to have COVID-19 infection:
In most cases, you do not need to shut down your facility.
If it has been less than 7 days since the sick employee has been in the facility, close off any areas used for prolonged periods of time by the sick person:
If it has been 7 days or more since the sick employee used the facility, additional cleaning and disinfection is not necessary.
Continue routinely cleaning and disinfecting all high-touch surfaces in the facility.
Follow the CDC cleaning and disinfection recommendations:
Determine which employees may have been exposed to the virus and may need to take additional precautions:
Educate employees about steps they can take to protect themselves at work and at home:
For employees who commute to work using public transportation or ride sharing, consider offering the following support:
Identify a workplace coordinator who will be responsible for COVID-19 issues and their impact at the workplace.
Implement flexible sick leave and supportive policies and practices:
Protect employees at higher risk for severe illness through supportive policies and practices.
Older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Communicate supportive workplace polices clearly, frequently, and via multiple methods.
Employers may need to communicate with non-English speakers in their preferred languages.
Assess your essential functions and the reliance that others and the community have on your services or products.
Determine how you will operate if absenteeism spikes from increases in sick employees, those who stay home to care for sick family members, and those who must stay home to watch their children until childcare programs and K-12 schools resume.
Establish policies and practices for social distancing.
Alter your workspace to help workers and customers maintain social distancing and physically separate employees from each other and from customers, when possible.
Here are some strategies that businesses can use:
If you have more than one business location, consider giving local managers the authority to take appropriate actions outlined in their COVID-19 response plans based on their local conditions.
Since COVID-19 may be spread by those with no symptoms, businesses and employers should evaluate and institute controls according to the hierarchy of controls to protect their employees and members of the general public.
Consider improving the engineering controls using the building ventilation system.
This may include some or all of the following activities:
Note: Some of the above recommendations are based on the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air-Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) Guidance for Building Operations During the COVID-19 Pandemicexternal icon.
Review these ASHRAE guidelines for further information on ventilation recommendations.
Ensure the safety of your building water system and devices after a prolonged shutdown:
Give employees, customers, and visitors what they need to clean their hands and cover their coughs and sneezes:
Perform enhanced cleaning and disinfection after persons suspected/confirmed to have COVID-19 have been in the facility:
Limit travel and advise employees if they must travel to take additional precautions and preparations:
Minimize risk to employees when planning meetings and gatherings:
The table below presents examples of controls to implement in your workplace.
The most effective controls are those that rely on engineering solutions, followed by administrative controls, then PPE.
PPE is the least effective control method and the most difficult to implement.
Worksites may have to implement multiple complementary controls from these columns to effectively control the hazard.
Below are changes as of March 21, 2020
Printer friendly versionpdf icon
During an infectious disease outbreak, such as the current outbreak of COVID-19, small business owners must prepare for disruption in their business as well as prepare to protect their employees health and safety in the workplace.
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness that can spread from person to person.
It spreads between people who are in close contact with one another (within about 6 feet) and through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes.
Symptoms can include fever, cough, or difficulty breathing, which may appear 2-14 days after exposure.
These steps are recommended to protect employees and prepare your business for disruption:
Identify a workplace coordinator who will be responsible for COVID-19 issues and their impact at the workplace.
Examine policies for leave, telework, and employee compensation.
Review your leave policies with all employees and provide information about available employee assistance services.
Share information on steps they can take to protect themselves at work and at home.
Identify essential employees and business functions, and other critical inputs such as raw materials, suppliers, subcontractor services/products, and logistics required to maintain business operations.
Explore ways you can continue business operations if there are disruptions.
Prepare business continuity plans for significant absenteeism, supply chain disruptions, or changes in the way you need to conduct business.
Establish an emergency communications plan.
Identify key contacts (with back-ups), chain of communications (including suppliers and customers), and processes for tracking and communicating about business and employee status.
Share your response plans with employees and clearly communicate expectations.
It is important to let employees know plans and expectations if COVID-19 occurs in communities where you have a workplace.
Healthy employees are crucial to your business.
Here are 10 ways to help them stay healthy.
Actively encourage sick employees to stay home.
Develop policies that encourage sick employees to stay at home without fear of reprisals, and ensure employees are aware of these policies.
Have conversations with employees about their concerns.
Some employees may be at higher risk for severe illness, such as older adults and those with chronic medical conditions.
Develop other flexible policies for scheduling and telework (if feasible) and create leave policies to allow employees to stay home to care for sick family members or care for children if schools and childcare close.
Talk with companies that provide your business with contract or temporary employees about their plans.
Discuss the importance of sick employees staying home and encourage them to develop non-punitive emergency sick leave policies.
Promote etiquette for coughing and sneezing and handwashing.
Provide tissues, no-touch trash cans, soap and water, and hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Plan to implement practices to minimize face-to-face contact between employees if social distancing is recommended by your state or local health department.
Actively encourage flexible work arrangements such as teleworking or staggered shifts.
Perform routine environmental cleaning.
Routinely clean and disinfect all frequently touched surfaces, such as workstations, countertops, handrails, and doorknobs.
Discourage sharing of tools and equipment, if feasible.
Consider the need for travel and explore alternatives.
Check CDCs Travelers Health for the latest guidance and recommendations.
Consider using teleconferencing and video conferencing for meetings, when possible.
Provide education and training materials in an easy to understand format and in the appropriate language and literacy level for all employees, like fact sheets and posters.
If an employee becomes sick while at work, they should be separated from other employees, customers, and visitors and sent home immediately.
Follow CDC guidelines for cleaning and disinfecting areas the sick employee visited.
For more tips and information See the CDC Interim Guidance for Businesses and Employers and the OSHA Guidance for Preparing Workplaces for COVID-19pdf iconexternal icon.
The following FAQs build on the Interim Guidance for Businesses and Employers and Guidance for Critical Infrastructure Workers.
These FAQs are not intended for healthcare facilities; CDC has provided separate Guidance for Healthcare Settings.
Employees who have symptoms when they arrive at work or become sick during the day should immediately be separated from other employees, customers, and visitors and sent home.
Employees who develop symptoms outside of work should notify their supervisor and stay home.
Sick employees should follow CDC-recommended steps to help prevent the spread of COVID-19.
Employees should not return to work until they have met the criteria to discontinue home isolation and have consulted with a healthcare provider.
Employers should not require sick employees to provide a COVID-19 test result or healthcare providers note to validate their illness, qualify for sick leave, or return to work.
Healthcare provider offices and medical facilities may be extremely busy and not able to provide such documentation in a timely manner.
In most cases, you do not need to shut down your facility.
But do close off any areas used for prolonged periods of time by the sick person:
Follow the CDC cleaning and disinfection recommendations:
In addition to cleaning and disinfecting, employers should determine which employees may have been exposed to the virus and need to take additional precautions:
Sick employees should follow CDC-recommended steps.
Employees should not return to work until they have met the criteria to discontinue home isolation and have consulted with a healthcare provider.
Antibody test results should not be used to make decisions about returning persons to the workplace.
Employees may have been exposed if they are a close contact of someone who is infected, which is defined as being within about 6 feet of a person with COVID-19 for a prolonged period of time:
All other employees should self-monitor for symptoms and wear cloth face coverings when in public.
If they develop symptoms, they should notify their supervisor and stay home.
See Public Health Recommendations for Community-Related Exposure for more information.
To ensure continuity of operations of essential functions, CDC advises that critical infrastructure employeesexternal icon may be permitted to continue work following potential exposure to COVID-19, provided they remain symptom-free and additional precautions are taken to protect them and the community.
See Implementing Safety Practices for Critical Infrastructure Employees Who May Have Had Exposure to a Person with Suspected or Confirmed COVID-19 and COVID-19 Critical Infrastructure Sector Response Planning for more information.
CDC does NOT recommend that employers use antibody tests to determine which employees can work.
Antibody tests check a blood sample for past infection with SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.
CDC does not yet know if people who recover from COVID-19 can get infected again.
Viral tests check a respiratory sample (such as swabs of the inside of the nose) for current infection with SARS-CoV-2.
CDC has published strategies for consideration of incorporating viral testing for SARS-CoV-2 into a workplace COVID-19 preparedness, response, and control plan.
Different states and jurisdictions may have their own guidance and priorities for viral testing in workplaces.
Testing in the workplace could be arranged through a companys occupational health provider or in consultation with the local or state health department.
Sick employees should follow steps to prevent the spread of COVID-19.
Employees should not return to work until they meet the criteria to discontinue home isolation and have consulted with a healthcare provider.
Employers should not require a sick employee to provide a negative COVID-19 test result or healthcare providers note to return to work.
Employees with COVID-19 who have stayed home can stop home isolation and return to work when they have met one of the sets of criteria found here.
Employees who appear to have COVID-19 symptoms upon arrival to work or become sick during the day with COVID-19 symptoms should immediately be separated from other employees, customers, and visitors and sent home.
Sick employees should follow steps to prevent the spread of COVID-19.
CDC has a symptom self-checker chatbot that employers and employees may find helpful.
It has a series of questions and recommends what level of medical care, if any, the user should seek.
It is not intended to provide diagnosis or treatment.
Acute respiratory illness is an infection of the upper or lower respiratory tract that may interfere with normal breathing, such as COVID-19.
Acute means of recent onset (for example, for a few days), and is used to distinguish from chronic respiratory illnesses like asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
No.
Allergy symptoms are not considered an acute respiratory illness.
However, there is some overlap between common seasonal allergy symptoms and some of the symptoms that have been reported by people with COVID-19 (e.g headache, sneezing, cough).
It is important to take into account whether an individuals symptoms are compatible with the usual symptoms and timing for allergy in that person.
To keep your employees safe, you should:
Evaluate your workplace to identify situations where employees cannot maintain a distance of at least 6 feet from each other and/or customers.
Use appropriate combinations of controls following the hierarchy of controls to addresses these situations to limit the spread of COVID-19.
A committee of both employees and management may be the most effective way to recognize all of these scenarios.
It is important to note that control recommendations or interventions assigned to reduce the risk of spreading COVID-19 must be compatible with any safety programs and personal protective equipment (PPE) normally required for the job task.
Approaches to consider may include the following:
Alter the workspace using engineering controls to prevent exposure to the virus that causes COVID-19.
Provide training and other administrative policies to prevent the spread of COVID-19.
Use cloth face coverings as appropriate.
PPE is the last step in the hierarchy of controls because it is harder to use effectively than other measures.
To be protective and not introduce an additional hazard, the use of PPE requires characterization of the environment, knowledge of the hazard, training, and consistent correct use.
This is why administrative and engineering controls are emphasized in guidance to slow the spread of COVID-19.
In the current pandemic, use of PPE such as surgical masks or N-95 respirators is being prioritized for healthcare employees and other medical first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance unless they were required for the job before the pandemic.
Have conversations with employees if they express concerns.
Some people may be at higher risk of severe illness.
This includes older adults (65 years and older) and people of any age with serious underlying medical conditions.
By using strategies that help prevent the spread of COVID-19 in the workplace, you will help protect all employees, including those at higher risk.
These strategies include:
In workplaces where it is not possible to eliminate face-to-face contact (such as retail), consider assigning employees who are at higher risk of severe illness work tasks that allow them to maintain a 6-foot distance from others, if feasible.
Employers should not require employees to provide a note from their healthcare provider when they are sick and instead allow them to inform their supervisors or employee health services when they have conditions that put them at higher risk for diseases.
Cloth face coverings can prevent the wearer from spreading COVID-19 to others, but they may not always be appropriate.
Employees should consider using an alternative under certain conditions at work, including:
Cloth face coverings should not be worn if their use creates a new risk (e.g interferes with driving or vision, contributes to heat-related illness) that exceeds their benefit of slowing the spread of the virus.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)pdf iconexternal icon suggests that an employee wear a face shield if a cloth face covering is recommended but the employee cannot tolerate wearing a cloth face covering.
If used, a face shield should cover the entire front and sides of the face and extend below the chin.
Source control is a term used to describe measures (e.g cloth face coverings or face shields) intended to prevent people with COVID-19 from spreading the disease to others.
COVID-19 is spread through droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
Evidence suggests that people who have mild symptoms or no symptoms can spread it to others without realizing they are infected.
Cloth face coverings and face shields are types of source control that provide a barrier between droplets produced from a potentially infected person and other people, reducing the likelihood of transmitting the virus.
No, cloth face coverings are not PPE.
These face coverings are not respirators and are not appropriate substitutes for them in workplaces where respirators are recommended or required for respiratory protection.
When wearing a cloth face covering, it should fit over the nose and mouth, fit snugly but comfortably against the side of the face, and be secured with ties or ear loops.
The cloth face covering should allow the wearer to breathe without restriction.
Employees should avoid touching their eyes, nose, or mouth as well as the inside or outside of the face covering while putting on, wearing, and removing it.
When putting on and removing it, they should only touch the ties or ear loops.
If storing the cloth face covering while at work, employees should place the used cloth face covering into a container or paper bag labeled with the employees name.
Cloth face coverings should not be shared with others unless they are washed and dried first.
If the cloth face covering becomes wet, visibly soiled, or contaminated at work, it should be removed and stored to be laundered later.
The employee should put on a clean cloth face covering or disposable face mask.
If cloth face coverings are provided by the employer, a clean face covering should be issued to replace the soiled one.
Employees should wash hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds before and after putting on, touching, or removing cloth face coverings.
If soap and water are not available, they should use a hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Laundry instructions depend on the cloth used to make the face covering.
In general, cloth face coverings should be washed regularly (e.g daily after each shift) using water and a mild detergent and dried completely in a hot dryer.
If a washing machine and dryer are not available, an alternative is to soak the cloth face covering in a diluted bleach (0.1%) solution, rinse, and air dry completely.
Hands should be washed before laundering the cloth face coverings.
CDC recommends employees protect themselves from respiratory illness with everyday preventive actions, including good hand hygiene.
Employees should wash hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, or use a hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol if soap and water are not readily available, especially during key times when persons are likely to be infected by or spread germs:
Employees should take the following steps to protect themselves at work:
Screening employees is an optional strategy that employers may use.
Performing screening or health checks will not be completely effective because asymptomatic individuals or individuals with mild non-specific symptoms may not realize they are infected and may pass through screening.
Screening and health checks are not a replacement for other protective measures such as social distancing.
Consider encouraging individuals planning to enter the workplace to self-screen prior to coming onsite and not to attempt to enter the workplace if any of the following are present:
*A lower temperature threshold (e.g 100.0oF) may be used, especially in healthcare settings.
If you decide to actively screen employees for symptoms rather than relying on self-screening, consider which symptoms to include in your assessment.
Although there are many different symptoms that may be associated with COVID-19, you may not want to treat every employee with a single non-specific symptom (e.g a headache) as a suspect case of COVID-19 and send them home until they meet criteria for discontinuation of isolation.
Consider focusing the screening questions on new or unexpected symptoms (e.g a chronic cough would not be a positive screen).
Consider including these symptoms:
There are several methods that employers can use to protect the employee conducting the screening.
The most protective methods incorporate social distancing (maintaining a distance of 6 feet from others), or physical barriers to eliminate or minimize the screeners exposures due to close contact with a person who has symptoms during screening.
Examples to consider that incorporate these types of controls for temperature screening include:
If social distance or barrier controls cannot be implemented during screening, PPE can be used when the screener is within 6 feet of an employee during screening.
However, reliance on PPE alone is a less effective control and more difficult to implement given PPE shortages and training requirements.
Discard PPE into a trash can.
Facility waste does not need disinfection.
Social distancing means avoiding large gatherings and maintaining distance (at least 6 feet) from others when possible.
Strategies that businesses could use include:
Employers that do not currently offer sick leave to some or all of their employees may want to draft non-punitive emergency sick leave policies.
Ensure that sick leave policies are flexible and consistent with public health guidance and that employees are aware of and understand these policies.
The Families First Coronavirus Response Actexternal icon (FFCRA or Act) requires certain employers to provide their employees with paid sick leave or expanded family and medical leave for specified reasons related to COVID-19.
Employers with fewer than 500 employees are eligible for 100% tax credits for Families First Coronavirus ​Response Act COVID-19 paid leave provided through December 31, 2020, up to certain limits.
Employers should not require sick employees to provide a COVID-19 test result or a healthcare providers note to validate their illness, qualify for sick leave, or to return to work.
Healthcare provider offices and medical facilities may be extremely busy and not able to provide such documentation in a timely manner.
Carefully consider whether travel is necessary and use videoconferencing or teleconferencing when possible for work-related meetings and gatherings.
Employers should consider canceling, adjusting, or postponing large work-related meetings or gatherings that can only occur in-person.
Follow CDC guidance for events and mass gatherings and consider resuming non-essential travel in accordance with state and local regulations and guidance.
When videoconferencing or teleconferencing is not possible, hold meetings in open, well-ventilated spaces, and space chairs at least 6 feet apart.
Encourage staff and attendees to stay home if sick.
Although travel should be minimized as much as possible during the COVID-19 pandemic, many jobs require travel, and it may not be possible to conduct certain job duties using virtual tools.
The following measures may be taken to protect employees while traveling:
For more information, see CDC guidance for travel in the United States
Current evidence, though still preliminary, suggests that SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, may remain viable for hours to days on surfaces made from a variety of materials.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
If the machinery or equipment in question are not accessible to employees or have not been in contact with someone infected with COVID-19, they will not present an exposure hazard.
If machinery or equipment are thought to be contaminated and can be cleaned, follow the CDC cleaning and disinfection recommendations.
First, clean dirty surfaces with soap and water.
Second, disinfect surfaces using products that meet EPAs criteria for use against SARS-Cov-2external icon and are appropriate for the surface.
If machinery or equipment are thought to be contaminated and cannot be cleaned, they can be isolated.
Isolate papers or any soft (porous) surfaces for a minimum of 24 hours before handling.
After 24 hours, remove soft materials from the area and clean the hard (non-porous) surfaces per the cleaning and disinfection recommendations.
Isolate hard (non-porous) surfaces that cannot be cleaned and disinfected for a minimum of 7 days before handling.
Follow safe work practices when using cleaning chemicalspdf icon:
The risk of spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 through ventilation systems has not been studied but is likely low.
Routine HVAC maintenance is recommended.
Although it is never the first line of prevention, consider general ventilation adjustments in your workplace, such as increasing ventilation and increasing the amount of outdoor air used by the system.
Maintain the indoor air temperature and humidity at comfortable levels for building occupants.
CDC and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) have jointly developed guidance for cleaning and disinfecting public spaces, including restrooms.
Employers should develop a plan for routine cleaning and disinfection, including the regular cleaning and disinfection of high-touch surfaces such as doorknobs, faucets, toilets, and other restroom furnishings.
Custodial staff should wear personal protective equipment (PPE) based on the setting and cleaning product they are using.
To protect your staff and ensure that the products are used effectively, staff should be instructed on how to apply the disinfectants according to label instructions and precautions.
Consider posting a cleaning schedule in the restrooms and marking off when each round of cleaning is completed.
Cleaning staff should clean and disinfect all areas including offices, bathrooms, and common areas, focusing especially on frequently touched surfaces.
Operations can resume as soon as the cleaning and disinfection are completed.
The Department of Homeland Security developed a listexternal icon of essential critical infrastructure employees to help state and local officials as they work to protect their communities, while ensuring continuity of functions critical to public health and safety as well as economic and national security.
State and local officials make the final determinations for their jurisdictions about critical infrastructure employees.
Functioning critical infrastructurepdf iconexternal icon is imperative during the response to the COVID-19 emergency, for both public health and safety as well as community well-being.
When continuous remote work is not possible, critical infrastructure businesses should use strategies to reduce the likelihood of spreading the disease.
This includes, but is not necessarily limited to, separating staff by off-setting shift hours or days and implementing social distancing.
These steps can preserve and protect the workforce and allow operations to continue.
To ensure continuity of operations of essential functions, CDC advises that critical infrastructure employees may be permitted to continue work following potential exposure to COVID-19, provided they remain asymptomatic and additional safety practices are implemented to protect them and the community.
However, reintegrating exposed, asymptomatic employees to onsite operations, while discussed in the critical infrastructure guidance, should not be misinterpreted as always being the first or most appropriate option to pursue in managing critical work tasks.
Staying home may still be the most preferred and protective option for exposed employees.
Critical infrastructure businesses have an obligation to limit, to the extent possible, the reintegration of in-person employees who have experienced an exposure to COVID-19 but remain symptom-free in ways that best protect the health of the employee, their co-employees, and the general public.
Create a critical infrastructure sector response plan.
Cross-training employees to perform critical job functions so the workplace can operate even if key employees are absent and match critical job functions with other equally skilled and available employees who have not experienced an exposure to COVID-19.
Critical infrastructure employees who have been exposed but remain symptom-free and must return to in-person work should adhere to the following practices before and during their work shift:
Employees with symptoms should be sent home and should not return to the workplace until they have met the criteria to discontinue home isolation.
See Implementing Safety Practices for Critical Infrastructure Employees Who May Have Had Exposure to a Person with Suspected or Confirmed COVID-19 for more information.
CDC has guidance for first responders and law enforcement as well as a series of fact sheets for specific critical infrastructure employee groups.
Unless otherwise specified, the CDC interim guidance for businesses and employers applies to critical infrastructure workplaces as well.
Printer-Friendly Versionpdf icon
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2.
Symptoms often include a fever, cough, or shortness of breath.
Our understanding of how the virus spreads is evolving as we learn more about it, so check the CDC website for the latest information.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person:
Recent studies indicate that the virus can be spread by people before they develop symptoms or who never develop symptoms.
It also may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions may be at higher risk for more serious complications from COVID-19.
CDC recommends wearing cloth face coverings in public settings where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, especially in areas of significant community-based transmission.
Cloth face coverings may prevent people who dont know they have the virus from transmitting it to others.
These face coverings are not surgical masks or respirators and are not appropriate substitutes for them in workplaces where masks or respirators are recommended or required.
As an airline catering kitchen worker, you could be exposed to COVID-19 in situations such as having close contact with someone with COVID-19 or touching your mouth, nose, or eyes after handling frequently touched items used by someone with COVID-19 such as catering or food service carts or solid waste.
Employers of airline catering kitchen workers should have a COVID-19 health and safety plan to protect employees.
This plan should be shared with you and your coworkers.
Your employer should:
Stay informed.
Talk to your employer, supervisor, union representative, or airport personnel who are responsible for responding to COVID-19 concerns.
See these sources for more information on reducing the risk of worker exposures to COVID-19:
Printer-Friendly Versionpdf icon
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2.
Symptoms often include a fever, cough, or shortness of breath.
Our understanding of how the virus spreads is evolving as we learn more about it, so check the CDC website for the latest information.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person:
Recent studies indicate that the virus can be spread by people before they develop symptoms or who never develop symptoms.
It also may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions may be at higher risk for more serious complications from COVID-19.
CDC recommends wearing cloth face coverings in public settings where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, especially in areas of significant community-based transmission.
Cloth face coverings may prevent people who dont know they have the virus from transmitting it to others.
These face coverings are not surgical masks or respirators and are not appropriate substitutes for them in workplaces where masks or respirators are recommended or required.
As an airline catering truck driver or helper, you could be exposed to COVID-19 in situations such as having close contact with someone with COVID-19 or touching your mouth, nose, or eyes after handling frequently touched items used by someone with COVID-19 such as catering and food service carts, used non-disposable food service items (e.g utensils and serving trays), and solid waste.
Employers of airline catering truck drivers or helpers should have a COVID-19 health and safety plan to protect employees.
This plan should be shared with you and your coworkers.
Your employer should:
Stay informed.
Talk to your employer, supervisor, union representative, or airport personnel who are responsible for responding to COVID-19 concerns.
See these sources for more information on reducing the risk of worker exposures to COVID-19:
Printer-Friendly Versionpdf icon
 Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2.
Symptoms often include a fever, cough or shortness of breath.
Our understanding of how the virus spreads is evolving as we learn more about it, so check the CDC website for the latest information.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person:
Recent studies indicate that the virus can be spread by people before they develop symptoms (pre-symptomatic) or who never develop symptoms (asymptomatic).
It also may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions may be at higher risk for more serious complications from COVID-19.
CDC recommends wearing cloth face coverings in public settings where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, especially in areas of significant community-based transmission.
Cloth face coverings may prevent people who dont know they have the virus from transmitting it to others.
These face coverings are not surgical masks or respirators and are not appropriate substitutes for them in workplaces where masks or respirators are recommended or required.
As a customer service representative or gate agent, potential sources of exposure could include assisting a person with COVID-19 in close contact or by touching your mouth, nose, or eyes; or handling passenger items, such as baggage, boarding passes, identification documents, credit cards, and mobile devices.
Your employer should have a COVID-19 health and safety plan to protect employees.
This plan should be shared with you and your coworkers.
Your employer should:
Stay informed.
Talk to your employer, supervisor, union representative, or airport personnel who are responsible for responding to COVID-19 concerns.
See these sources for more information on reducing the risk of worker exposures to COVID-19:
Printer-Friendly Versionpdf icon
 Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2.
Symptoms often include a fever, cough or shortness of breath.
Our understanding of how the virus spreads is evolving as we learn more about it, so check the CDC website for the latest information.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person:
Recent studies indicate that the virus can be spread by people before they develop symptoms (pre-symptomatic) or who never develop symptoms (asymptomatic).
It also may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions may be at higher risk for more serious complications from COVID-19.
CDC recommends wearing cloth face coverings in public settings where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, especially in areas of significant community-based transmission.
Cloth face coverings may prevent people who dont know they have the virus from transmitting it to others.
These face coverings are not surgical masks or respirators and are not appropriate substitutes for them in workplaces where masks or respirators are recommended or required.
For baggage or cargo handlers, while the general risk remains low, potential sources of exposure could include surfaces touched or handled by a person with COVID-19 or by touching your mouth, nose, or eyes.
Your employer should develop a COVID-19 health and safety plan to protect employees.
This plan should be shared with you and your coworkers.
Your employer should:
Stay informed.
Talk to your employer, supervisor, union representative, or airport personnel who are responsible for responding to COVID-19 concerns.
See these sources for more information on reducing the risk of worker exposures to COVID-19:
Printer-Friendly Versionpdf icon
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2.
Symptoms often include a fever, cough or shortness of breath.
Our understanding of how the virus spreads is evolving as we learn more about it, so check the CDC website for the latest information.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person:
Recent studies indicate that the virus can be spread by people before they develop symptoms (pre-symptomatic) or who never develop symptoms (asymptomatic).
It also may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions may be at higher risk for more serious complications from COVID-19.
CDC recommends wearing cloth face coverings in public settings where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, especially in areas of significant community-based transmission.
Cloth face coverings may prevent people who dont know they have the virus from transmitting it to others.
These face coverings are not surgical masks or respirators and are not appropriate substitutes for them in workplaces where masks or respirators are recommended or required.
As an airport custodial staff, while the general risk remains low, potential sources of exposure could include handling solid waste or cleaning public facilities (such as waste bins, tables, chairs, basins, toilets) with which a person with COVID-19 has interacted or by touching your mouth, nose, or eyes.
Your employer should develop a COVID-19 health and safety plan to protect employees.
This plan should be shared with you and your coworkers.
Your employer should:
Stay informed.
Talk to your employer, supervisor, union representative, or airport personnel who are responsible for responding to COVID-19 concerns.
See these sources for more information on reducing the risk of worker exposures to COVID-19:
Printer-Friendly Versionpdf icon
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2.
Symptoms often include a fever, cough, or shortness of breath.
Our understanding of how the virus spreads is evolving as we learn more about it, so check the CDC website for the latest information.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person:
Recent studies indicate that the virus can be spread by people before they develop symptoms (pre-symptomatic) or who never develop symptoms (asymptomatic).
It also may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions may be at higher risk for more serious complications from COVID-19.
CDC recommends wearing cloth face coverings in public settings where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, especially in areas of significant community-based transmission.
Cloth face coverings may prevent people who dont know they have the virus from transmitting it to others.
These face coverings are not surgical masks or respirators and are not appropriate substitutes for them in workplaces where masks or respirators are recommended or required.
As an airport passenger service worker, potential sources of exposure can occur from assisting, transporting, or escorting a person with COVID-19 and their belongings or by touching your mouth, nose, or eyes.
Your employer should develop a COVID-19 health and safety plan to protect employees.
This plan should be shared with you and your coworkers.
Your employer should:
Stay informed.
Talk to your employer, supervisor, union representative, or airport personnel who are responsible for responding to COVID-19 concerns.
See these sources for more information on reducing the risk of worker exposures to COVID-19:
Printer-Friendly Versionpdf icon
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2.
Symptoms often include a fever, cough, or shortness of breath.
Our understanding of how the virus spreads is evolving as we learn more about it, so check the CDC website for the latest information.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person:
Recent studies indicate that the virus can be spread by people before they develop symptoms or who never develop symptoms.
It also may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions may be at higher risk for more serious complications from COVID-19.
CDC recommends wearing cloth face coverings in public settings where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, especially in areas of significant community-based transmission.
Cloth face coverings may prevent people who dont know they have the virus from transmitting it to others.
These face coverings are not surgical masks or respirators and are not appropriate substitutes for them in workplaces where masks or respirators are recommended or required.
As an aircraft maintenance worker, you could be exposed to COVID-19 in situations such as when you have close contact with someone with COVID-19, when you touch surfaces while repairing aircraft interiors and lavatories that have been touched or handled by a person with COVID-19, or by touching your mouth, nose, or eyes.
Employers of aircraft maintenance workers should develop a COVID-19 health and safety plan to protect employees.
This plan should be shared with you and your coworkers.
Employers should:
Stay informed.
Talk to your employer, supervisor, union representative, or airport personnel who are responsible for responding to COVID-19 concerns.
See these sources for more information on reducing the risk of worker exposures to COVID-19:
Printer-Friendly Versionpdf icon
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2.
Symptoms often include a fever, cough or shortness of breath.
Our understanding of how the virus spreads is evolving as we learn more about it, so check the CDC website for the latest information.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person:
Recent studies indicate that the virus can be spread by people before they develop symptoms or who never develop symptoms.
It also may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions may be at higher risk for more serious complications from COVID-19.
CDC recommends wearing cloth face coverings in public settings where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, especially in areas of significant community-based transmission.
Cloth face coverings may prevent people who dont know they have the virus from transmitting it to others.
These face coverings are not surgical masks or respirators and are not appropriate substitutes for them in workplaces where masks or respirators are recommended or required.
As an airport retail or food service worker, potential sources of exposure can occur while working in an airport store, bar, restaurant, or food concession stand if you are if in close contact with someone with COVID-19 or by touching your mouth, nose, or eyes after handling items used by someone with COVID-19.
Your employer should have a COVID-19 health and safety plan to protect employees.
This plan should be shared with you and your coworkers.
Your employer should:
Stay informed.
Talk to your employer, supervisor, union representative, or airport personnel who are responsible for responding to COVID-19 concerns.
See these sources for more information on reducing the risk of worker exposures to COVID-19:
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness (see list of symptoms) caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2.
Heres what we currently know:
COVID-19 can sometimes cause serious health problems.
People at increased risk for severe illness include:
As a bus transit employer, your workforce might come into contact with the virus when
Evaluate your workplace to identify scenarios where workers cannot maintain social distancing of at least 6 feet from each other and/or customers.
Use appropriate combinations of controls following the hierarchy of controls to address these situations to limit the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19.
A committee of both workers and management staff may be most effective at recognizing all scenarios.
While protecting workers, it is important to note that control recommendations or interventions to reduce risk of spreading COVID-19 must be compatible with any safety programs and personal protective equipment (PPE) normally required for the job task.
Approaches to consider may include the following:
Create a COVID-19 Workplace Health and Safety Plan 
Review the CDC Interim Guidance for Businesses and Employers and the Resuming Business Toolkit for guidelines and recommendations that all employers can use to protect their employees.
Take action if an employee is suspected or confirmed to have COVID-19 
Develop hazard controls using the hierarchy of controls to prevent infection among workers.
You may be able to include a combination of controls noted below.
Mental health is an important component of worker safety and health.
The COVID-19 pandemic has created new challenges in the ways many people work and interact with others, which may lead to increased feelings of stress, anxiety, and depression.
Information and resources about mental health, recognizing signs of stress, taking steps to build resilience and manage stress, and knowing where to go if you, your staff, or others need help are available on CDCs How to Cope with Job Stress and Build Resiliance During the COVID-19 Pandemic page.
You, as the employer, are responsible for responding to COVID-19 concerns and informing employees of the hazards in your workplace.
You can utilize these additional sources for more information on reducing the risk of exposures to COVID-19 at work:
Prevent COVID-19 exposure at work
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2.
Symptoms often include cough, shortness of breath, fever, chills, muscle pain, sore throat, or new loss of taste or smell.
Our understanding of how the virus spreads is evolving as we learn more about it, so check the CDC website for the latest information.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person:
Recent studies indicate that the virus can be spread by people who are not showing symptoms.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
This is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads, but we are still learning more about this virus.
Older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions may be at higher risk for more serious complications from COVID-19.
As a grocery or food retail worker, potential sources of exposures include close contact for prolonged periods of time with a customer with COVID-19 and touching your nose, mouth, or eyes after handling items, cash, or merchandise that customers with COVID-19 have touched.
Grocery and food retail establishment employers should have a COVID-19 health and safety plan to protect employees, following CDC Interim Guidance for Businesses and Employers.
This plan should be shared with you and your coworkers.
Employers should:
Stay informed.
Talk to your employer or supervisor, who is responsible for responding to COVID-19 concerns.
Utilize these sources for more information on reducing the risk of worker exposures to COVID-19:
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness (see list of symptoms) caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2.
COVID-19 can sometimes cause serious health problems.
People at increased risk for severe illness include:
As a rail transit operator employer, your workforce might come into contact with the virus when
Evaluate your workplace to identify scenarios where workers cannot maintain social distancing of at least 6 feet from each other and/or customers.
Use appropriate combinations of controls following the hierarchy of controls to address these situations to limit the spread of COVID-19.
A committee of both workers and management staff may be most effective at recognizing all scenarios.
While protecting workers, it is important to note that control recommendations or interventions to reduce risk to spreading COVID-19 must be compatible with any safety programs and personal protective equipment (PPE) normally required for the job task.
Approaches to consider may include the following:
Create a COVID-19 Workplace Health and Safety Plan
Review the CDC Interim Guidance for Businesses and Employers and the Resuming Business Toolkit for guidelines and recommendations that all employers can use to protect their employees.
Take action if an employee is suspected or confirmed to have COVID-19.
Develop hazard controls using the hierarchy of controls to prevent infection among workers.
You may be able to include a combination of controls noted below.
PPE is the last step in the hierarchy of controls because it is more difficult to use effectively than other measures.
To be protective and not introduce an additional hazard, the use of PPE requires characterization of the environment, knowledge of the hazard, training, and consistent correct use.
This is why special emphasis is given to administrative and engineering controls when addressing occupational hazards, including when applying guidance to slow the spread of SARS-CoV-2.
In the current COVID-19 pandemic, use of PPE such as surgical masks or N95 respirators is being prioritized for healthcare workers and other medical first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
Mental health is an important component of worker safety and health.
The COVID-19 pandemic has created new challenges in the ways many people work and interact with others, which may lead to increased feelings of stress, anxiety, and depression.
Information and resources about mental health, recognizing signs of stress, taking steps to build resilience and manage stress, and knowing where to go if you, your staff, or others need help are available here.
You, as the employer, are responsible for responding to COVID-19 concerns and informing employees of the hazards in your workplace.
You can utilize these additional sources for more information on reducing the risk of exposures to COVID-19 at work:
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness (see list of symptoms) caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2.
Heres what we currently know:
COVID-19 can sometimes cause serious health problems.
People at increased risk for severe illness include:
As a transit maintenance employer, your workforce might come into contact with the virus when
Evaluate your workplace to identify scenarios where workers cannot maintain social distancing of at least 6 feet from each other and/or customers.
Use appropriate combinations of controls following the hierarchy of controls to address these situations to limit the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19.
A committee of both workers and management staff may be most effective at recognizing all scenarios.
While protecting workers, it is important to note that control recommendations or interventions to reduce risk of spreading COVID-19 must be compatible with any safety programs and personal protective equipment (PPE) normally required for the job task.
Approaches to consider may include the following:
Create a COVID-19 Workplace Health and Safety Plan 
Review the CDC Interim Guidance for Businesses and Employers and the Resuming Business Toolkit for guidelines and recommendations that all employers can use to protect their employees.
Take action if an employee is suspected or confirmed to have COVID-19 
Develop hazard controls using the hierarchy of controls to prevent infection among workers.
You may be able to include a combination of controls noted below.
PPE requires characterization of the environment, knowledge of the hazard, training, and consistent correct use.
This is why special emphasis is given to administrative and engineering controls when addressing occupational hazards, including when applying guidance to slow the spread of SARS-CoV-2.
In the current COVID-19 pandemic, use of PPE such as surgical masks or N95 respirators is being prioritized for healthcare workers and other medical first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance, unless they were required for the job before the pandemic.
Mental health is an important component of worker safety and health.
The COVID-19 pandemic has created new challenges in the ways many people work and interact with others, which may lead to increased feelings of stress, anxiety, and depression.
Information and resources about mental health, recognizing signs of stress, taking steps to build resilience and manage stress, and knowing where to go if you, your staff, or others need help are available here.
You, as the employer, are responsible for responding to COVID-19 concerns and informing employees of the hazards in your workplace.
You can utilize these additional sources for more information on reducing the risk of exposures to COVID-19 at work:
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness (see list of symptoms) caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2.
COVID-19 can sometimes cause serious health problems.
People at increased risk for severe illness include:
As a transit station employer, your workforce might come into contact with the virus when
Evaluate your workplace to identify scenarios where workers cannot maintain social distancing of at least 6 feet from each other and/or customers.
Use appropriate combinations of controls following the hierarchy of controls to address these situations to limit the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19.
A committee of both workers and management staff may be most effective at recognizing all scenarios.
While protecting workers, it is important to note that control recommendations or interventions to reduce risk of spreading COVID-19 must be compatible with any safety programs and personal protective equipment (PPE) normally required for the job task.
Approaches to consider may include the following:
Create a COVID-19 Workplace Health and Safety Plan
Review the CDC Interim Guidance for Businesses and Employers and the Resuming Business Toolkit for guidelines and recommendations that all employers can use to protect their employees.
Take action if an employee is suspected or confirmed to have COVID-19
Develop hazard controls using the hierarchy of controls to prevent infection among workers.
You may be able to include a combination of controls noted below.
PPE is the last step in the hierarchy of controls because it is harder to use effectively than other measures.
To be protective and not introduce an additional hazard, the use of PPE requires characterization of the environment, knowledge of the hazard, training, and consistent correct use.
This is why administrative and engineering controls are emphasized when addressing occupational hazards, including when applying guidance to slow the spread of SARS-CoV-2.
In the current COVID-19 pandemic, use of PPE such as surgical masks or N95 respirators is being prioritized for healthcare workers and other medical first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance, unless they were required for your job before the pandemic.
Mental health is an important component of worker safety and health.
The COVID-19 pandemic has created new challenges in the ways many people work and interact with others, which may lead to increased feelings of stress, anxiety, and depression.
Information and resources about mental health, recognizing signs of stress, taking steps to build resilience and manage stress, and knowing where to go if you, your staff, or others need help are available here.
You, as the employer, are responsible for responding to COVID-19 concerns and informing employees of the hazards in your workplace.
You can utilize these additional sources for more information on reducing the risk of exposures to COVID-19 at work:
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2.
Symptoms often include cough, shortness of breath, fever, chills, muscle pain, sore throat, or new loss of taste or smell.
Our understanding of how the virus spreads is evolving as we learn more about it, so check the CDC website for the latest information.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person:
Recent studies indicate that the virus can be spread by people who are not showing symptoms.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
This is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads, but we are still learning more about this virus.
Older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions may be at higher risk for more serious complications from COVID-19.
As a mail and parcel delivery driver, potential sources of exposure include having close contact with co-workers or delivery recipients, or when you touch surfaces touched or handled by a person who has COVID-19.
Stay home if you are sick
Mail and parcel delivery employers should develop a COVID-19 response plan to protect employees, following CDC business guidance.
This plan should be shared with you and your coworkers.
Your employer should consider the following guidance:
Stay informed.
Talk to your employer-designated contact or union representative about your concerns related to COVID-19.
See these sources for more information on worker exposures to COVID-19:
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2.
Symptoms often include cough, shortness of breath, fever, chills, muscle pain, sore throat, or new loss of taste or smell.
Our understanding of how the virus spreads is evolving as we learn more about it, so check the CDC website for the latest information.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person:
Recent studies indicate that the virus can be spread by people who are not showing symptoms.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
This is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads, but we are still learning more about this virus.
Older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions may be at higher risk for more serious complications from COVID-19.
As a driver-for-hire, potential sources of exposure include having close contact with passengers with COVID-19, or touching surfaces touched or handled by a person with COVID-19.
Stay home if you are sick
The rideshare services or taxi/limo transportation companies for whom you are a contract driver should develop and share a set of COVID-19 response measures to inform and help protect drivers and passengers.
They should:
Stay informed.
Review health and safety measures taken by your rideshare or transportation company about COVID-19.
See these sources for more information on worker exposures to COVID-19:
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2.
Symptoms often include cough, shortness of breath, fever, chills, muscle pain, sore throat, or new loss of taste or smell.
Our understanding of how the virus spreads is evolving as we learn more about it, so check the CDC website for the latest information.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person:
Recent studies indicate that the virus can be spread by people who are not showing symptoms.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
This is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads, but we are still learning more about this virus.
Older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions may be at higher risk for more serious complications from COVID-19.
Potential sources of exposure include having close contact with individuals with COVID-19 when picking up or delivering food or groceries, or by touching surfaces touched or handled by a person with COVID-19.
Stay home if you are sick 
The food or grocery delivery company for whom you are a contract driver should develop and share a set of COVID-19 health and safety measures to inform and help protect delivery drivers.
They should:
Stay informed.
Review health and safety measures taken by your delivery service company about COVID-19.
See these sources for more information on worker exposures to COVID-19:
Interim guidance to prevent spread of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
The more an individual interacts with others, and the longer that interaction, the higher the risk of COVID-19 spread.
Elections with only in-person voting on a single day are higher risk for COVID-19 spread because there will be larger crowds and longer wait times.
Lower risk election polling settings include those with:
The virus that causes COVID-19, is mostly spread by respiratory droplets released when people talk, cough, or sneeze.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
Personal prevention practices (such as handwashing, staying home when sick) and environmental cleaning and disinfection are important actions election officials, poll workers, and voters can take to help lower the risk of COVID-19 spread.
Vendor and Manufacturer Guidance on Cleaning Voting Machines and Other Election Technologyexternal icon
Cybersecurity Infrastructure and Security Agency Election Security Resourcesexternal icon
Finding Voting Locations and Poll Workerspdf iconexternal icon
Considerations for Modifying the Scale of In-Person Votingpdf iconexternal icon
Health and Safety at the Polling Placepdf iconexternal icon
Safeguarding Staff and Working Environment from COVID-19pdf iconexternal icon
Information for Event Planners and Individuals
Printer friendly versionpdf icon
Creating an emergency plan for mass gatherings and large community events, such as concerts and sporting events, can help protect the health of your staff, attendees, and the local community.
This planning should include:
CDC does not have a limit or recommend a specific number of attendees for these types of events and instead encourages event organizers to focus on ways to limit peoples contact with each other.
Each event organizer will need to determine the appropriate number for their setting in collaboration with local health officials.
They should also check state, county, and city rules regarding any current restrictions limiting the number of attendees at events.
In general, the number that is chosen should allow individuals to remain at least 6 feet apart from each other.
Rather than focusing on an ideal number, event organizers and administrators should focus on the ability to reduce and limit contact between attendees, staff, and others.
In general, the more people you interact with, the more closely you interact with them, and the longer that interaction, the higher your risk of getting and spreading COVID-19.
Indoor spaces are more risky than outdoor spaces because indoors, it can be harder to keep people at least 6 feet apart and the ventilation is not as good as it is outdoors.
Yes.
CDC recommends several strategies for this.
For instance, organizers can:
CDC does not recommend testing all attendees and staff before allowing them to enter.
Testing all event attendees and staff for COVID-19 before allowing them to enter the venue has not been systematically studied.
It is unknown if entry testing at event venues provides any additional reduction in person-to-person transmission of the virus beyond what would be expected with other preventive measures (such as social distancing, wearing cloth face coverings, hand washing, enhanced cleaning and disinfection).
CDC does recommend conducting health checks such as temperature screening and/or symptom checking of staff and attendees safely and respectfully, and in accordance with any applicable privacy laws and regulations.
Yes.
CDC recommends that people wear cloth face coverings in public settings and when around people who dont live in their household, especially when other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain.
CDC recommends that organizers require staff to wear cloth face coverings and encourage attendees ahead of events to bring and wear cloth face coverings at the event.
Cloth face coverings are most essential when physical distancing is difficult (such as when moving within a crowd or audience).
Cloth face coverings are meant to protect other people in case the wearer is unknowingly infected but does not have symptoms.
Cloth face coverings are not surgical masks or respirators.
They are not personal protective equipment.
Cloth face coverings are strongly encouraged in settings where individuals might raise their voices (such as shouting, chanting, singing).
Provide all staff with information on proper use, removal, and washing of cloth face coverings.
Advise staff that cloth face coverings should not be placed on:
Encourage staff and attendees to take everyday preventive actions to help prevent the spread of respiratory illnesses, such as COVID-19.
This includes:
Event staff should use several strategies to maintain healthy environments, including cleaning and disinfection:
Consult with local public health officials and continually assess, based on current conditions, whether to postpone, cancel, or significantly reduce the number of attendees (if possible) at an event or gathering.
When determining if you should postpone or cancel a large gathering or event, consider the:
Share these resources to help people understand COVID-19 and steps they can take to help protect themselves:
If a staff member or attendee becomes sick at your event, separate them from others as soon as possible and until they can go home.
Provide them with clean, disposable facemaskspdf iconpdf icon to wear, if available.
If not available, provide them with a cloth face covering, which can be improvised if needed from a tee shirt, bandana or other clothing, as well as a tissue or some other way to cover their coughs and sneezes.
If needed, contact emergency services for those who need emergency care.
Public transportation, shared rides, and taxis should be avoided for sick persons.
Be sure to contact local public health officials regarding the possible case of COVID-19 at your event and how to communicate with staff and attendees about possible exposure to the virus.
Read more about preventing the spread of COVID-19 if someone is sick.
CDC has guidance for cleaning and disinfecting rooms and areas where a person with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 has visited.
See Environmental Cleaning and Disinfection Recommendations.
Printer friendly version pdf icon1 page
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness that can spread from person to person.
The outbreak first started in China, but cases have been identified in a growing number of other areas, including the United States.
Law enforcement who must make contact with individuals confirmed or suspected to have COVID-19 should follow CDCs Interim Guidance for EMS.
Different styles of PPE may be necessary to perform operational duties.
These alternative styles (i.e.
coveralls) must provide protection that is at least as great as that provided by the minimum amount of PPE recommended.
*If unable to wear a disposable gown or coveralls because it limits access to duty belt and gear, ensure duty belt and gear are disinfected after contact with individual.
For law enforcement personnel performing daily routine activities, the immediate health risk is considered low.
Law enforcement leadership and personnel should follow CDCs Interim General Business Guidance.
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2.
Symptoms often include cough, shortness of breath, fever, chills, muscle pain, sore throat, or new loss of taste or smell.
Our understanding of how the virus spreads is evolving as we learn more about it, so check the CDC website for the latest information.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person:
Recent studies indicate that the virus can be spread by people who are not showing symptoms.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
This is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads, but we are still learning more about this virus.
Older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions may be at higher risk for more serious complications from COVID-19.
Stay informed.
Talk to your employer, supervisor, union representative, or occupational health provider who is responsible for responding to COVID-19 concerns.
See these sources for more information:
Parks, trails, and open spaces can provide opportunities for physical activity while also providing opportunities for a break, health, and wellness.
People are encouraged to use parks, trails, and open spaces safely while following current guidance to prevent the spread of COVID-19.
The following offers guidance for the use and administration of local, state, and national parks.
Public parks and recreational facilities can be operated and managed by groups such as:
Administrators of parks and recreational facilities can determine, in collaboration with local health officials, whether and how to implement these considerations, making adjustments to meet the unique needs and circumstances of the local community.
Implementation should be guided by what is safe, feasible, practical, and acceptable, and be tailored to the needs of each community.
These considerations are meant to supplement — not replace — any local, state, territorial, federal, or tribal health and safety laws, rules, or regulations with which park administrators must comply.
Help lower the risk of spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 by following these guiding principles:
If community transmission does not prohibit the public from visiting a park, trail, or open space, park administrators are encouraged to consider the levels of risk below when operating parks, trails, and open spaces.
The risk of the virus that causes COVID-19 spreading at parks, trails, and open spaces is ranked as follows, from lowest to highest:
Park staff clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces (e.g doorknobs or handrails) and shared objects between uses or on a frequent schedule with EPA approved productsexternal icon.
*Different area could be another town, city, or county.
Park administrators should consider displaying posters and signs throughout the park to frequently remind visitors to take steps to prevent the spread of COVID-19.
These messages should include information about:
If possible, restrooms should be open if a park is open for public visitation.
If restrooms will be closed, notify visitors ahead of time so they can prepare appropriately.
Ensure that open restrooms are:
NOTE: Often restroom facilities without running water, such as portable toilets and vault toilets, are not stocked with hand hygiene products.
Encourage visitors to bring their own hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol for use in these facilities.
Evidence suggests that COVID-19 cannot be spread to humans through most recreational water.
Additionally, proper operation of these aquatic venues and disinfection of the water (with chlorine or bromine) should inactivate the virus that causes COVID-19.
In order to decrease the chance of COVID-19 spread, park administrators should consider:
This interim guidance is based on what is currently known about coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) will update this interim guidance as needed and as additional information becomes available.
Printer friendly versionpdf icon
A revision was made on 5/10/2020 to reflect the following:
People experiencing unsheltered homelessness (those sleeping outside or in places not meant for human habitation) may be at risk for infection when there is community spread of COVID-19.
This interim guidance is intended to support response to COVID-19 by local and state health departments, homelessness service systems, housing authorities, emergency planners, healthcare facilities, and homeless outreach services.
Homeless shelters and other facilities should also refer to the Interim Guidance for Homeless Shelters.
Community and faith-based organizations can refer to the Interim Guidance for Communities of Faith for other information related to their staff and organizations.
COVID-19 is caused by a new coronavirus.
We are learning about how it spreads, how severe it is, and other features of the disease.
Lack of housing contributes to poor physical and mental health outcomes, and linkages to permanent housing for people experiencing homelessness should continue to be a priority.
In the context of COVID-19 spread and transmission, the risks associated with sleeping outdoors or in an encampment setting are different than from staying indoors in a congregate setting such as an emergency shelter or other congregate living facility.
Outdoor settings may allow people to increase physical distance between themselves and others.
However, sleeping outdoors often does not provide protection from the environment, adequate access to hygiene and sanitation facilities, or connection to services and healthcare.
The balance of risks should be considered for each individual experiencing unsheltered homelessness.
Planning and response to COVID-19 transmission among people experiencing homelessness requires a whole communityexternal icon approach, which means involving partners in the response plan development, with clearly outlined roles and responsibilities.
Table 1 outlines some of the activities and key partners to consider for a whole-community approach.
Table 1: Using a community-wide approach to prepare for COVID-19 among people experiencing homelessness
People with lived experiences of homelessness can help with planning and response.
These individuals can serve as peer navigators to strengthen outreach and engagement efforts.
Develop an advisory board with representation from people with current or former experiences of homelessness to ensure community plans are effective.
Depending on resources and staff availability, housing options that have individual rooms (such as hotels/motels) and separate bathrooms should be considered for the overflow, quarantine, and protective housing sites.
In addition, plan for how to connect clients to housing opportunities after they have completed their stay in these temporary sites.
Outreach workers and other community partners, such as emergency food provision programs or law enforcement, can help ensure people sleeping outside have access to updated information about COVID-19 and access to services.
Help clients prevent becoming sick with COVID-19
Help link sick clients to medical care
This interim guidance is based on what is currently known about coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) will update this interim guidance as needed and as additional information becomes available.
Printer friendly versionpdf icon
A revision was made on 5/10/2020 to reflect the following:
People experiencing unsheltered homelessness (those sleeping outside or in places not meant for human habitation) may be at risk for infection when there is community spread of COVID-19.
This interim guidance is intended to support response to COVID-19 by local and state health departments, homelessness service systems, housing authorities, emergency planners, healthcare facilities, and homeless outreach services.
Homeless shelters and other facilities should also refer to the Interim Guidance for Homeless Shelters.
Community and faith-based organizations can refer to the Interim Guidance for Communities of Faith for other information related to their staff and organizations.
COVID-19 is caused by a new coronavirus.
We are learning about how it spreads, how severe it is, and other features of the disease.
Lack of housing contributes to poor physical and mental health outcomes, and linkages to permanent housing for people experiencing homelessness should continue to be a priority.
In the context of COVID-19 spread and transmission, the risks associated with sleeping outdoors or in an encampment setting are different than from staying indoors in a congregate setting such as an emergency shelter or other congregate living facility.
Outdoor settings may allow people to increase physical distance between themselves and others.
However, sleeping outdoors often does not provide protection from the environment, adequate access to hygiene and sanitation facilities, or connection to services and healthcare.
The balance of risks should be considered for each individual experiencing unsheltered homelessness.
Planning and response to COVID-19 transmission among people experiencing homelessness requires a whole communityexternal icon approach, which means involving partners in the response plan development, with clearly outlined roles and responsibilities.
Table 1 outlines some of the activities and key partners to consider for a whole-community approach.
Table 1: Using a community-wide approach to prepare for COVID-19 among people experiencing homelessness
People with lived experiences of homelessness can help with planning and response.
These individuals can serve as peer navigators to strengthen outreach and engagement efforts.
Develop an advisory board with representation from people with current or former experiences of homelessness to ensure community plans are effective.
Depending on resources and staff availability, housing options that have individual rooms (such as hotels/motels) and separate bathrooms should be considered for the overflow, quarantine, and protective housing sites.
In addition, plan for how to connect clients to housing opportunities after they have completed their stay in these temporary sites.
Outreach workers and other community partners, such as emergency food provision programs or law enforcement, can help ensure people sleeping outside have access to updated information about COVID-19 and access to services.
Help clients prevent becoming sick with COVID-19
Help link sick clients to medical care
This interim guidance is based on what is currently known about coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) will update this interim guidance as needed and as additional information becomes available.
Printer friendly versionpdf icon
A revision was made on 4/21/2020 to reflect the following:
People experiencing homelessness are at risk for infection during community spread of COVID-19.
This interim guidance is intended to support response planning by emergency management officials, public health authorities, and homeless service providers, including overnight emergency shelters, day shelters, and meal service providers.
COVID-19 is caused by a new coronavirus.
We are learning about how it spreads, how severe it is, and other features of the disease.
Transmission of COVID-19 in your community could cause illness among people experiencing homelessness, contribute to an increase in emergency shelter usage, and/or lead to illness and absenteeism among homeless service provider staff.
Early and sustained action to slow the spread of COVID-19 will keep staff and volunteers healthy, and help your organization maintain normal operations.
Planning and response to COVID-19 transmission among people experiencing homelessness requires a whole communityexternal icon approach, which means that you are involving partners in the development of your response planning, and that everyones roles and responsibilities are clear.
Table 1 outlines some of the activities and key partners to consider for a whole-community approach.
Table 1: Using a community-wide approach to prepare for COVID-19 among people experiencing homelessness
Depending on resources and staff availability, non-group housing options (such as hotels/motels) that have individual rooms should be considered for the overflow, quarantine, and protective housing sites.
In addition, plan for how to connect clients to housing opportunities after they have completed their stay in these temporary sites.
Have supplies on hand for staff, volunteers, and those you serve, such as:
The following is a screening tool that can be used to identify people with possible symptoms of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Although not every person who has symptoms will have COVID-19, conducting daily screenings consisting of a series of simple questions can help identify people who may need medical care or isolation.
If someone screens positive for symptoms, they should be directed to where they can stay according to a predesignated plan developed with the local Continuum of Care (CoC), public health department, and community leadership.
For more details, see the Interim Guidance for Homeless Service Providers to Plan and Respond to Coronavirus Disease 2019 and the Interim Guidance on Unsheltered Homelessness and Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) for Homeless Service Providers and Local Officials.
If the client has a fever OR a new/worsening cough OR any of the other symptoms:
Use standard shelter protocols for medical emergencies.
Temporal thermometers use an infrared scanner to measure the temperature of the temporal artery in the forehead.
Temperature takers should keep as much distance from clients as they can, wear a mask and provide one to the client to wear, wash their hands with soap and water or use alcohol-based hand sanitizer (at least 60% alcohol) regularly, and use gloves if available.
Because many people who are homeless are older adults or have underlying medical conditions they may also be at increased risk for severe illness than the general population.
Health departments and healthcare facilities should be aware that people who are homeless are a particularly vulnerable group.
If possible, identifying non-congregate settings where those at increased risk can stay may help protect them from COVID-19.
Many of the recommendations to prevent COVID-19 may be difficult for a person experiencing homelessness to do.
Although it may not be possible to avoid certain crowded locations (such as shelters), people who are homeless should try to avoid other crowded public settings and public transportation.
If possible, they should use take-away options for food.
As is true for everyone, they should maintain a distance of about 6 feet (two arms length) from other people.
They also should wash their hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds as often as possible, and cover their coughs and sneezes.
Any person experiencing homelessness with symptoms consistent with COVID-19 (fever, cough, or shortness of breath) should alert their service providers (such as case managers, shelter staff, and other care providers).
These staff will help the individual understand how to isolate themselves and identify options for medical care as needed.
If they meet criteria for testing, people experiencing homelessness will access COVID-19 testing through a healthcare provider.
Local public health and healthcare facilities need to determine the best location for this testing in coordination with homeless healthcare clinics and street medicine clinics.
Those with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 should stay in a place where they can best be isolated from other people to prevent spreading the infection.
Local health departments, housing authorities, homeless service systems and healthcare facilities should plan to identify locations to isolate those with known or suspected COVID-19 until they meet the criteria to end isolation.
Isolation housing could be units designated by local authorities or shelters determined to have capacity to sufficiently isolate these people.
If no other options are available, homeless service providers  should plan for how they can help people isolate themselves while efforts are underway to provide additional support.
Please see the Interim Guidance for Homeless Service Providers and Interim Guidance for People Experiencing Unsheltered Homelessness for more information.
Homeless service providers can accept donations during community spread of COVID-19, but general infection control precautions should be taken.
Request that donors not donate if they are sick.
Set up donation drop-off points to encourage social distancing between shelter workers and those donating.
According to usual procedures, launder donated clothing, sheets, towels, or other fabrics on high heat settings, and disinfect items that are nonporous, such as items made of plastic.
Food donations should be shelf-stable, and shelter staff should take usual food-related infection prevention precautions.
For more information about COVID-19 and food, see the Food and Drug Administrations website on Food Safety and COVID-19external icon.
For further information on cleaning and disinfection, see here.
Homeless shelters can screen clients for symptoms of respiratory infections.
Clients who have symptoms may or may not have COVID-19.
Make sure they have a separate place they can safely stay within the shelter or at an alternate site in coordination with local health authorities.
An on-site nurse or other clinical staff can help with clinical assessments.
Notify the designated medical facility and personnel to transfer clients that the client might have COVID-19.
Homeless shelters serve a critical function in our communities.
Shelters should stay open unless homeless service providers, health departments, and housing authorities have determined together that a shelter needs to close.
Connecting people to stable housing should continue to be a priority.
However, if individual housing options are not available, allow people who are living in encampments to remain where they are.
Encourage people living in encampments to increase space between people and provide hygiene resources in accordance with the Interim Guidance for People Experiencing Unsheltered Homelessness.
The information provided in these FAQs do not cover all questions or issues faced by custodial settings (prisons, jails, and detention facilities).
As with the full CDC guidance document, this information may need to be adapted based on individual facilities physical space, staffing, population, operations, and other resources and conditions.
Facilities should contact CDC or their state, local, territorial, and/or tribal public health departmentexternal icon if they need assistance in applying actions or concerns not specifically covered in the CDC guidance.
Because of close contact and the number of people in correctional and detention facilities (including prisons and jails), staff and people who are incarcerated are at greater risk for the spread of germs.
To help your facility prepare for the possible spread of COVID-19, update your emergency operations plan.
This includes:
Follow CDC guidance on recommended PPE for staff who will have direct contact with an individual with possible COVID-19 infection, or infectious materials.
Make contingency plans for the likely event of PPE shortages.
Follow the CDC Interim Clinical Guidance for Management of Patients with Confirmed Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) and monitor the guidance website regularly for updates for staff evaluating and providing care for confirmed or suspected COVID-19 cases.
When no on-site healthcare capacity is available, make a plan for how to ensure that people suspected to have COVID-19 will be medically isolated, evaluated, tested (if indicated), and provided medical care.
Contact and collaborate with your state, local, tribal and territorial health departments for more specific guidance.
The best way to protect your staff is to prevent exposure.
Start by:
Review the Occupational Safety and Health Administration websiteexternal iconexternal icon and guidance for businesses and employers to identify any additional strategies the facility can use within its role as an employer.
Staff evaluating and providing care for people with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 should follow the CDC Interim Clinical Guidance for Management of Patients with Confirmed Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) and monitor the guidance website regularly for updates to these recommendations.
Facilities without on-site health care capacity should make a plan for how they will ensure that suspected COVID-19 cases will be medically isolated, evaluated, tested (if indicated), and provided medical care.
Contact and collaborate with your state, local, tribal, and territorial health departments for more specific guidance.
The best way to prevent illness among people who are incarcerated is to prevent exposure to the virus that causes COVID-19.
Start by:
You can get up-to-date information about local COVID-19 activity by keeping in touch with your local and state public health officialsexternal iconexternal icon, and keeping up-to-date with the CDC website.
If COVID-19 is known to be spreading in the local community close to your facility, but there are no confirmed cases among people who are incarcerated, staff, or visitors who have been inside the facility within the past 14 days:
New entrants should undergo temperature screening in addition to the following verbal screening questions:
Staff performing temperature checks should follow these steps:
If there is spread of COVID-19 in the community close to your facility, consider suspending contact visits.
If contact visits continue, all potential visitors should be asked:
Staff should also perform temperature checks for all visitors and volunteers.
Any visitor who answers yes to one of these questions or who declines screening should not be allowed into the facility.
When possible, facilities should let potential visitors know about these rules before they travel to the facility.
Facilities can place posters in visiting areas and ask people who are incarcerated to inform their family members and visitors about these rules.
To limit the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19, routinely clean and disinfect surfaces and objects that are touched often.
Read CDC guidance on cleaning and disinfecting to learn more.
This may include cleaning objects and surfaces not ordinarily cleaned daily, such as doorknobs, light switches, and countertops.
Clean with the cleaners typically used.
Use all cleaning products according to the directions on the label.
For disinfection, most common EPA-registered household disinfectants should be effective.
A list of products that are EPA-approved for use against the virus that causes COVID-19 is available<!--&nbsp;herepdf iconexternal icon-->.
If you think someone who is incarcerated in the facility is sick with COVID-19 (see COVID-19 symptoms), activate your emergency plan and notify local public health officials.
Ensure that the sick person is wearing a clean, disposable facemaskpdf icon, and separate the sick person from others, ideally within an individual housing space and bathroom.
Provide them with tissues for when they cough or sneeze, and a lined trash receptacle when possible.
Staff evaluating and providing care for confirmed or suspected COVID-19 cases should follow the CDC Interim Clinical Guidance for Management of Patients with Confirmed Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) and monitor the guidance website regularly for updates to these recommendations.
Facilities without on-site healthcare staff should contact their state, local, tribal, and/or territorial health department to coordinate effective isolation and necessary medical care.
Ensure only trained personnel wearing recommended personal protective equipment (PPE) have contact with or transport individuals who have or may have COVID-19.
People who are incarcerated and have COVID-19 should be placed under medical isolation in a separate room, ideally with solid walls and a solid door that closes fully.
If not available, refer to the full guidance document for other options for medical isolation.
If multiple people become ill with COVID-19:
Provide clear information to staff and people who are incarcerated about the presence of COVID-19 cases within the facility.
Close contacts of the sick person (who have been within 6 feet of the sick person or had direct contact with infectious droplets, such as from a cough or sneeze) should be placed under quarantine for at least 14 days.
Follow CDC guidance on quarantining close contacts of people with COVID-19.
If separate spaces for individual quarantined people are not available, refer to the full guidance document for other options.
Monitor symptoms twice per day and move anyone developing symptoms to medical isolation right away (after ensuring they are wearing a face mask).
Quarantined people at high risk for complications of COVID-19 (older adults, people with severe underlying chronic medical conditions) should not be housed with other quarantined people if at all possible.
If you think someone on your staff is sick with COVID-19 (see COVID-19 symptoms), activate your emergency plan and notify public health officials.
Give them a clean, disposable facemaskpdf iconpdf icon and send them home right away.
Close contacts of the sick person (who have been within 6 feet of the sick person or have had direct contact with infectious droplets, such as from a cough or sneeze) should self-quarantine at for 14 days home and follow CDC recommended steps for people who are sick with COVID-19 symptoms.
Follow guidance for cleaning and disinfecting rooms and areas where a person with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 have visited, including transport vehicles.
Ensure staff or people who are incarcerated wear appropriate PPE when cleaning the facility and handling food service items of people with possible or confirmed COVID-19.
Laundry of a person with COVID-19 may be washed with the laundry of other individuals.
Individuals handling laundry should wear recommended PPE, should not shake the laundry, and should clean their hands often to prevent spread of COVID .
If there is a case of COVID-19 in your facility, suspend contact visitation programs.
Instead, use virtual visitation when possible.
Facilities should ensure that incarcerated individuals receive medical evaluation and treatment at the first sign of COVID-19 symptoms.
Staff evaluating and providing care for confirmed or suspected COVID-19 cases should follow the CDC Interim Clinical Guidance for Management of Patients with Confirmed Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) and monitor the guidance website regularly for updates to these recommendations.
Facilities without on-site healthcare staff should contact their state, local, tribal, and/or territorial health department to coordinate effective medical isolation and necessary medical care.
Facilities should have a plan in place to safely transfer persons with complications from COVID-19 to a local hospital if they require care beyond what the facility is able to provide.
When evaluating and treating persons with symptoms of COVID-19 who do not speak English, provide a translator when possible.
Spanish and Simplified Chinese materials are available for those who need them.
Close contacts of a sick person (who have been within about 6 feet of the sick person or have had direct contact with infectious droplets, such as from a cough or sneeze) should be placed under quarantine for 14 days to determine if they develop symptoms.
CDC has developed guidance on quarantining close contacts of people with COVID-19.
Be sure to monitor symptoms twice a day and move anyone developing symptoms to medical isolation right away, after ensuring that they are wearing a face mask.
Individuals under quarantine should stay within the quarantine space, including when eating their meals, using the bathroom, and receiving medical evaluation.
Laundry of people in quarantine can be washed with the laundry of others.
Individuals handling laundry should wear recommended PPE, should not shake the laundry, and should clean their hands often.
Ideally, people under quarantine due to contact with a COVID-19 case should be housed individually.
If separate spaces in a facility are not available, refer to CDCs full guidance document for correctional and detention centers for other options.
People at high risk for complications of COVID-19 (older adults, people with severe underlying chronic medical conditions) should not be housed with other quarantined people if at all possible.
Facilities without enough space or without onsite healthcare capacity should coordinate with local public health officials.
Individuals in quarantine can be released from quarantine back to their previous housing arrangement in the facility if they have not developed symptoms during the 14-day time period.
The best way to prevent illness is to take steps to avoid being exposed to this virus.
Start by ensuring you and others around you use everyday preventive actions (such as washing hands often, avoiding touching your eyes, nose, and mouth, and covering your cough).
Read How to Protect Yourself to learn more.
If there is spread of COVID-19 in the community close to the facility, you will be asked daily about symptoms over the last 24 hours and any contact you had with someone infected with COVID-19 in the last 14 days.
Your temperature will also be checked daily.
Staff and people incarcerated in correctional and detention facilities are at greater risk for some illnesses, such as COVID-19, because of the close living arrangements inside the facility.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person, through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
This is why washing your hands regularly and avoid close contact with other people when possible prevents illness.
If you think you have been exposed to COVID-19 and develop a fever or symptoms of respiratory illness, such as cough or difficulty breathing, stay home.
If you are at work, alert your supervisor right away and go home.
Read What To Do if You Are Sick to learn more.
Anyone who has close contact with a person with COVID-19 will need to stay away from other people for at least 14 days to see whether symptoms develop.
If you are a close contact of a person with COVID-19, you should self-quarantine at home by staying in a separate room away from others.
Read Caring for Yourself at Home and What To Do if You Are Sick to learn more.
The best way to prevent illness is to take steps to avoid being exposed to this virus.
Start by ensuring you and others around you use everyday preventive actions (such as washing hands often, avoiding touching your eyes, nose, and mouth, and covering your cough).
Read How to Protect Yourself to learn more.
People in correctional and detention facilities are at greater risk for some illnesses, such as COVID-19, because of close living arrangements with other people.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person, through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or be launched into the air and inhaled into someones lungs.
It is possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or eyes; however, this is not the most likely way the virus spreads.
If you think you have been exposed to COVID-19 and develop a fever or symptoms of respiratory illness, such as cough or difficulty breathing, alert facility staff right away to make sure you receive medical care and protect the people around you from being exposed to the virus.
Anyone who has close contact with a person with COVID-19 will need to stay away from other people for at least 14 days to make sure they arent sick as well.
This means that they will be placed in a room separate from others, or just with other people who have also been exposed to the same sick person.
During this time, they will be checked for COVID-19 symptoms.
If testing is available, a person in quarantine may be tested several times until medical staff are sure they do not have the virus.
Anyone who has had flu-like symptoms in the last 24 hours or has been in contact with someone who has or is suspected to have COVID-19 in last 14 days should not visit a correctional or detention facility.
All visitors will be screened for symptoms and contact with someone with COVID-19.
Staff will also perform temperature checks on all visitors.
Visitors should contact the facility about their rules on visits before they travel.
If a person in the facility has COVID-19, visitors may not be allowed to enter the facility.
Instead, non-contact visits can be used, when possible.
Incarcerated and detained people spend almost all of their time within congregate environments where groups of people share the same space, which increases the chance for COVID-19 to spread once introduced.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into someones lungs.
Spread is more likely when people are in close contact with one another (within about 6 feet).
It is possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes; however, this is not the most likely way the virus spreads.
COVID-19 may also be spread by people who are not showing symptoms.
Learn more about how COVID-19 spreads.
Anyone who has had close contact with a person with COVID-19 will need to be put into quarantine for 14 days.
This means that they will be placed in a room separate from others, until staff are sure that they dont have symptoms.
If symptoms develop during the 14-day period, and/or the person in quarantine tests positive for COVID-19, they should be placed under medical isolation and evaluated.
If symptoms do not develop and they do not test positive for COVID-19, quarantine restrictions can be lifted, or removed, after the 14-day period ends.
Quarantine procedures may differ by facility.
To help protect each visitors health and the health of staff, family members, or friends inside the facility, contact visits are discouraged during the COVID-19 pandemic.
You should not visit a correctional or detention facility if you:
Prior to a planned visit, you should make sure that visitation has not been suspended and review the facilitys rules about visits.
If there is someone in the facility who has COVID-19, visitors might not be allowed to enter the facility.
Some facilities may arrange for non-contact visits when possible, and staff may screen and perform temperature checks on all visitors.
You should also wear cloth face coverings.
Wearing cloth face coverings may be difficult for people with sensory, cognitive, or behavioral issues and is not recommended for children under 2 years or anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the covering without assistance.
Depending on the steps facilities are taking and the length of stay, people released from a facility may have had screenings for COVID-19 symptoms, temperature checks, or even a test—a pre-release planning process.
The family member or friend may have also been offered information and resources on how to prevent COVID-19.
If they were sick at the time of release, they may have been linked to community resources to make sure they follow proper medical isolation and have access to medical care.
There are things that family members and people who share housing can do to promote a healthy home and prevent getting sick.
Youre encouraged to find a room where the person can stay alone for at least 14 days and monitor their symptoms.
During that time, they should limit contact with others within and outside the home, particularly people who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 like older adults and those with underlying medical conditions.
They should avoid providing care for children during this time, if possible.
Friends and family should keep a distance of at least 6 feet, and everyone should consider wearing a cloth face covering, especially when going out in public.
Finally, frequent handwashing, as well as cleaning and disinfecting frequently touched surfaces, are also important.
If the person who was just released, or anyone in your household, develops symptoms or tests positive for COVID-19, please follow CDC recommendations for what to do if you become sick or have to care for someone who is sick.
At the request of tribal leaders, federal partners developed this Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) fact sheet to help guide tribes with funeral and burial health and safety.
This fact sheet also helps tribes plan for an increase in deaths within a community.
Tribes and families practice unique traditions and refer to death in varying ways as they honor those who have passed on.
We share this public health guidance with sincere respect for those traditions.
Please visit cdc.gov for the most updated guidance on COVID-19.
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a new disease, and we are still learning about how it spreads and the severity of illness it causes.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is believed to spread person-to-person between people who are in close contact (being within about 6 feet) with one another.
Some people without symptoms may be able to spread the virus.
The virus likely spreads primarily through saliva or mucus droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
This is somewhat like how the flu (influenza) and other infections such as the common cold spread.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be breathed in.
Droplets can remain on surfaces such as countertops and doorknobs for hours to days.
COVID-19 can cause mild to severe illness.
This can result in someone being admitted to the hospital and even an intensive care unit.
It can even cause death.
People who are infected often have symptoms of illness.
Older adults and people of any age who have certain underlying medical conditions might be at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
This includes people with serious heart conditions, severe obesity, diabetes, chronic kidney disease (or undergoing dialysis), liver disease, chronic lung disease or moderate to severe asthma, or people who have a weakened immune system (immunocompromised).
Everyone can take actions, such as social distancing, to help slow the spread.
Tribes have asked for guidance to help them plan for increased death from COVID-19.
While an increase in deaths may be a very difficult topic to discuss and plan for, tribal leaders have resources to help:
Tribal leaders can also do the following:
There is currently no known risk associated with being in the same room at a funeral or visitation service with the body of someone who died of COVID-19.
Anyone who is sick should stay home.
These actions help prevent people from getting sick and help stop the spread of the virus.
Also, tribal leaders can help.
While each tribe has its own traditions regarding death rituals and funerals (including family feeds, giveaways, and commemorative gatherings), it is important for leaders to determine ways for immediate family members to take part while making sure that
CDC recommends wearing masks in public settings where social distancing is difficult to maintain (for example, at grocery stores and pharmacies).
This is especially important in communities where COVID-19 is spreading.
So, if you do go to a funeral or gathering, use a mask.
But also try to keep about 6 feet from others who are present.
You can find more information about using a mask.
Do not place masks on young children under age 2.
Also, dont place a mask on anyone who has trouble breathing or who is unconscious or unable to remove the mask without assistance.
More information on large gatherings and events.
You should avoid touching the body of someone who has died of COVID-19, before the body is prepared for viewing.
Though we are still learning more about how COVID-19 spreads, it may be possible that you could get COVID-19 by touching the body of someone who has died of COVID-19.
After the body has been prepared for viewing there may be less of a chance of the virus spreading from certain types of touching, such as holding the hand or hugging.
But you should avoid other activities, such as kissing, washing, and shrouding before and during body preparation.
After any contact with the body, be sure to wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds.
If soap and water are not readily available, use a hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol.
If washing the body, shrouding, or other important religious or cultural practices are observed in a specific tribal community, families are encouraged to consider this guidance and work with their cultural and religious leaders and funeral home staff on how to reduce their exposure as much as possible.
If you participate in these activities, wear disposable gloves (nitrile, latex, or rubber).
And you may need additional equipment (called personal protective equipment, or PPE).
For example, you may need the following:
Following preparation of the body remove PPE and throw away.
Immediately wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds.
If soap and water are not available, use a hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol.
Shower after completing body preparation activities.
If you did not wear any personal protective equipment while preparing the body, wash your clothes in the warmest setting possible and dry them completely.
For more information see CDC resources on Cleaning and Disinfecting Your Facility or Cleaning and Disinfecting Your Home.
Follow these steps if you are involved in transporting the body of someone who died from COVID-19:
People who died from COVID-19 can be buried or cremated.
But check for any additional tribal, state, local, or territorial requirements that may dictate the handling and disposition of the body of individuals who have passed from certain infectious diseases.
After the body has been prepared for viewing and burial, clean surfaces using EPA-approved products in accordance with manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (such as concentration, application method, and contact time).
Information on cleaning and sanitizing can be found on the CDC website:
Spouses and families of American Indian/Alaska Native Veterans may be eligible for burial assistance.
Burial benefits can include opening and closing of the grave, perpetual care, a government headstone or marker, a burial flag, and a Presidential Certificate—at no cost to the family.
Some veterans may also be eligible to receive money to help cover the cost (burial allowances).
The National Cemetery Administration oversees burial benefits.
This office is under the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), Veterans Benefits Administration.
The VA can be contacted at the following phone numbers:
The CDC has many resources available for you and your community:
For further information, or to provide comment on this resource, please contact the CDC Emergency Operations Center at preparedness@cdc.gov.
CDC/ATSDR is committed to promoting the health and safety of American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) communities.
Everyone has a role to play to reduce and slow the transmission of COVID-19.
Social distancing is an essential step in preventing the spread of COVID-19.
Social distancing is reducing physical interaction between people and it lowers the chances of spreading illness between people.
Practice social distancing by putting space (at least 6 feet) between yourself and others.
It is especially important during the COVID-19 pandemic to protect people who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
These people include older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions.
People can follow social distancing by reducing how often they are physically near others, reducing the overall number of people they are physically near, and by keeping at least 6 feet away from others when they do leave their homes.
Staying physically apart is important, even in places like the workplace, school, when shopping, or in other places in your community.
The goal of social distancing is to reduce the risk of spreading COVID-19.
Social distancing may make some people feel socially or culturally isolated, and possibly lead to loneliness, depression and poor health.
It is important to use other non-physical ways to connect with family and friends, like sending a letter, phone calls, video calls, or social media.
Exercising in or around your home or yard and sitting or working outside, close to home, can also help.
Social distancing to stay healthy and safe may prevent people from following some traditional and ceremonial practices.
This may be especially relevant for American Indian/Alaska Native (AI/AN) communities, but it is very important to use social distancing to reduce the spread of COVID-19.
Below are some ways to cope with social distancing (also known as physical distancing) and the stress COVID-19 may cause:
Coping with stress during a COVID-19 outbreak will make you, your loved ones, and your community stronger.
Learn more.
People who need help or know someone that needs help with stress or anxiety can contact the Disaster Distress Helplineexternal icon at 1-800-985-5990, or talk to a counselor or social worker that may be available in your area.
AI/AN communities with multi-generational households or those in rural or tribal areas may experience unique challenges with social distancing, access to grocery stores, water, and local and tribal health services.
However, there are several steps individuals can take to keep your home and family safe.
Wash hands often following these steps:
People who live in multi-generational tribal households may find it difficult to take precautions to protect themselves from COVID-19 or isolate those who are sick, especially if space in the household is limited and many people live in the same household.
Everyone in the household should limit risks
Everyone in the household should take steps to stay healthy and protect each other from getting sick.
Note: Masks should not be placed on children younger than 2 years old, anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, or anyone who is unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Elders and people with certain underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for serious illness from COVID-19.
If your household includes one or more people who are at higher risk then all family members should act as if they, themselves, are at higher risk.
Limit the risks when taking trips out of the house
Members of the household should consider ways to limit the risks when there is a need to leave the house like going to a grocery store or market, tribal healthcare facility, or pharmacy.
If possible, have at least two weeks of medications and supplies available.
When you make trips outside the house:
Family members who are at higher risk should avoid caring for children and those who are sick
Elders and people who have underlying medical conditions, such as diabetes or serious heart conditions, should avoid caring for the children in their household, if possible.
If people at higher risk must care for the children in their household, the children in their care should not have contact with people outside the household.
Members of the household who are at higher risk should also avoid caring for people of any age who are sick.
Separate a household member who is sick
Provide a separate bedroom and bathroom for the person who is sick, if possible.
If thats not possible, try to separate them from other household members as much as you can.
Keep people at higher risk separated from anyone who is sick.
If you need to share a room with someone who is sick:
If you need to share a bathroom with someone who is sick, the person who is sick should clean and disinfect the commonly touched surfaces in the bathroom after each use.
If this is not possible, the person who does the cleaning should:
If more than one household member is sick, have household members who are sick stay in one area of the home, separated from household members who are not sick.
Individuals who are at risk include:
It is important for people who are at higher risk for severe illness:
If someone in your home is sick with COVID-19
If caring for a sick household member
For questions, issues, or requests, tribal leaders can contact CDC.
Other guidance dedicated to tribal members can be found through the following links:
Households Living in Close Quarters: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/daily-life-coping/living-in-close-quarters.html
Living in Shared Housing: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/daily-life-coping/shared-housing/index.html
Shared and Congregate Housing: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/community/shared-congregate-house/index.html
COVID-19 in Racial and Ethnic Minority Groups: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/need-extra-precautions/racial-ethnic-minorities.html
Guidance and Tips for Tribal Community Living During COVID-19: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/community/tribal/social-distancing.html
Revisions were made on August 12, 2020 to reflect the following:
Revisions were made on July 21, 2020 to reflect the following:
Revisions were made on June 17, 2020 to reflect the following:
Revisions were made on June 12, 2020 to reflect the following:
Revisions were made on May 12, 2020 to reflect the following:
CDC guidance for COVID-19 may be adapted by state and local health departments to respond to rapidly changing local circumstances.
Who this guidance is for: Veterinarians and veterinary staff providing care to companion animals
Purpose: The intent of this guidance is to facilitate preparedness and to ensure practices are in place in a companion animal veterinary clinical setting to help people and animals stay safe and healthy.
This interim guidance is based on what is currently known about the transmission and severity of COVID-19.
This is a rapidly evolving situation.
CDC will update this guidance as needed, and as additional information becomes available.
States may have their own specific requirements for these circumstances.
Please check the CDC COVID-19 website periodically for updated information as well as interim guidance.
Veterinarians should use their best clinical judgement when evaluating companion animals and considering appropriate PPE to use and precautions to take.
Note: The scientific name of this novel coronavirus is severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2).
In people, the disease caused by the virus is called Coronavirus Disease 2019, or COVID-19.
In the context of animal health, we refer to the disease as SARS-CoV-2.
SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19 in humans, is thought to be spread primarily through respiratory droplets from coughing, sneezing, or talking.
There are also reports that people may be able to spread the virus while pre-symptomatic or asymptomatic.
We are still learning about this novel zoonotic virus, and it appears that in some rare situations, human to animal transmission can occur.
CDC is aware of a small number animals, including dogs and cats, reportedexternal icon to be infected with SARS-CoV-2 after close contact with people with COVID-19.
The United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) and CDC recently reported confirmed infection with SARS-CoV-2 in two pet cats with mild respiratory illness in New York, which were the first confirmed cases of SARS-CoV-2 infections in companion animals in the United States.
Both cats are expected to recover.
The cats had close contact with people confirmed or suspected to have COVID-19, suggesting human-to-cat spread.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals could be affected by SARS-CoV-2.
Limited information is available to characterize the spectrum of clinical illness associated with SARS-CoV-2 infection in animals.
Clinical signs thought to be compatible with SARS-CoV-2 infection in animals include fever, coughing, difficulty breathing or shortness of breath, lethargy, sneezing, nasal/ocular discharge, vomiting, and diarrhea.
Follow CDCs guidance on what to do if you are sick.
Tell staff to stay home if they are sick.
Employees who appear to have COVID-19 symptoms (e.g fever, cough, or shortness of breath) upon arrival at work or who become sick during the day should immediately be separated from other clinic employees, customers, and clients and sent home:
Inform the staffs team members if they have been exposed to someone who might have COVID-19, while maintaining confidentiality as required by the Americans with Disabilities Act.
Notify the local health department of the potential exposure as well.
Note: However, critical workers, like veterinarians and their staff, can be permitted to continue to work following a potential exposure to COVID-19, provided they remain asymptomatic and additional precautions are implemented to protect them and the workplace.
Everyone who enters the clinic, including employees and visitors, should wear a mask over their nose and mouth to contain respiratory secretions, unless engaged in an activity that requires PPE.
Implement sick leave policies for veterinary clinic staff that are flexible, nonpunitive, and consistent with public health guidance, allowing employees to stay home if they have symptoms of respiratory infection.
Follow CDC guidelines for cleaning and disinfecting areas the sick employee visited.
If possible, staff should each have their own workspace/equipment and avoid sharing desks/work tools.
If these items must be shared, they should be frequently disinfected.
To protect staff and preserve PPE and supplies during the COVID-19 pandemic, veterinary clinics should make considerations to protect both human and animal health.
Veterinarians should apply careful professional judgement to case management so that needed care for animals continues to be provided while limiting staff and client person-to-person exposure and conserving PPE.
This may also include prioritizing urgent patient visits and postponing non-urgent veterinary visits and elective procedures until regular business operations resume in your community.
In some jurisdictions, executive orders will directly influence what types of procedures may be performed.
The greatest risk of COVID-19 exposure to staff at veterinary clinics comes from person-to-person transmission through respiratory droplets from coughing, sneezing, or talking, which is the main way SARS-CoV-2 spreads.
Clinic staff should be screened daily, at the beginning of shifts prior to interacting with staff and clients, and should practice social distancing.
Clinics should take precautions to minimize staff contact with all pet owners.
Examples of actions to take to minimize contact with pet owners or other people include:
Have a plan in place to handle animals with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 exposure, or potentially compatible clinical signs.
Veterinarians should contact their state public health veterinarianpdf iconexternal icon or state animal health officialexternal icon for guidance on testing animals for SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Before scheduled appointments or upon arrival, a staff person should ask if the pet has had any exposure to a person with suspected or confirmed COVID-19.
If a pet owner currently has respiratory symptoms or is suspected of or confirmed to have COVID-19, they should not visit the veterinary facility.
Consider whether a telemedicine consult is appropriate.
If possible, a healthy friend or family member from outside their household should bring the animal to the veterinary clinic.
The clinic should use all appropriate precautions to minimize contact with the person bringing the animal to the clinic.
If there is an emergency with the animal, the animal should not be denied care.
The clinical spectrum of illness for the SARS-CoV-2 virus remains largely undefined in animals.
Companion animals may present with respiratory or gastrointestinal clinical signs based on the presentation of other coronaviruses more commonly found in animals as well as other emerging coronaviruses, including SARS-CoV-1 infection.
Clinical signs more likely to be compatible with SARS-CoV-2 infection in mammalian animals may include a combination of the following:
Given current limitations in knowledge regarding COVID-19 and companion animals, these PPE guidelines use a cautious approach.
Recommendations may change over time, as new information becomes available.
Veterinarians should use their professional judgement regarding potential for exposure to COVID-19 and PPE resource constraints when determining the appropriate PPE precautions to apply.
1PPE Standard Precautions should be applied in any setting where veterinary care is delivered and if exposure to exudates, feces, saliva, or other animal fluids is possible.
2A companion animals exposure to SARS-CoV-2 or COVID-19 exposure in this context refers to the following conditions within the 14 days before the animal is presented for veterinary care:
3Reusable (i.e washable) gowns are typically made of polyester or polyester-cotton fabrics.
Gowns of these fabrics can be safely laundered according to routine procedures and reused.
4Respiratory protection that is at least as protective as a fit tested NIOSH-certified disposable N95 filtering facepiece respirator is recommended.
5 Clinical signs expected to be compatible with possible SARS-CoV-2 infection in companion animals may include:
Veterinarians should consider the patients potential for exposures to COVID-19 when determining whether the patient has suspected SARS-CoV-2 infection.
6Aerosol-generating procedures, such as suction or bronchoscopy, should be avoided if possible on any animals that have been exposed to or are suspected of being infected with SARS-CoV-2.
7An N95 mask may be preferred depending on practitioners judgement.
More than one donning method may be acceptable.
Training and practice using your clinics procedure is critical.
More information on how to Put On (Don) PPE and how to Take Off (Doff) PPE can be found here.
Facilities implementing reuse or extended use of PPE will need to adjust their donning and doffing procedures to accommodate those practices.
Masks are not considered PPE.
They are designed for source control of droplets being emitted by the wearer.
There is no guarantee of filtration efficiency with a reusable/washable mask.
Single use nitrile and latex gloves should never be reused.
Elastomeric half facepiece respirators and reusable face shields and goggles must be doffed and decontaminated in a designated area.
Decontamination areas/surfaces should be considered dirty and signage should indicate this designated area.
Routine testing of companion animals for SARS-CoV-2 is currently not recommended.
Animal testing for SARS-CoV-2 is available for mammalian species for certain situations; testing is not currently available for amphibians, reptiles, fish, or birds.
Veterinarians are strongly encouraged to rule out other, more common causes of illness before considering SARS-CoV-2 testing, especially among companion animals without a COVID-19 exposure.
Take a thorough history to assess for likely exposure or risk factors in the 2 weeks prior to symptom onset, such as whether the animal has been in contact with a person diagnosed with COVID-19, a person with COVID-19 compatible symptoms, or had recent exposure to a known high-risk environment, such as a nursing home.
Veterinarians who have evaluated a companion animal and determined that it is consistent with SARS-CoV-2 testing guidance should contact their state public health veterinarianpdf iconexternal icon (SPHV) or state animal health officialexternal icon to discuss testing options.
If an animal test is presumptive positive, veterinarians should immediately contact their state public health veterinarian or state veterinarian regarding next steps, and the testing laboratory should contact USDAs National Veterinary Services Laboratories for guidance on forwarding samples for confirmatory testing.
Confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infections in animals must be reported by USDA to the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE).external icon
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited data available, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
We are still learning about this virus, and it appears that in some rare situations, people can spread the virus to animals.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals could be affected by the virus and the role animals may play in the spread of COVID-19.
Veterinarians should assess whether pets infected with SARS-CoV-2 can be cared for at home.
Considerations for home isolation include whether:
If the pet can be isolated at home, advise the pet owner to do the following:
Veterinary clinics or hospitals caring for ill, test-positive companion animals should have:
Where deemed appropriate, repeat testing of pets for SARS-CoV-2 or additional testing (e.g serology) should be conducted in coordination with a state public health veterinarian and/or state animal health official.
If the companion animal is test-positive for SARS-CoV-2, monitoring, isolation, and movement restrictions can end if these conditions are met:
Based on currently available information and clinical expertise, older adults and people of any age who have certain underlying medical conditions might be at increased risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Based on what we know at this time, pregnant people might be at an increased risk for severe illness from COVID-19 compared to non-pregnant people.
Additionally, there may be an increased risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes, such as preterm birth, among pregnant people with COVID-19.
For people at increased risk for severe illness and pregnant veterinary staff, facilities may want to consider limiting exposure of these individuals to both pet owners with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 and to sick animals with a history of exposure to a human COVID-19 case.
Informing pet owners on what is known about companion animals and SARS-CoV-2 is important to help them stay safe and healthy around their pets.
Below are key messages to share with pet owners:
Revisions were made on September 10, 2020, to reflect the following:
Revisions were made on June 20, 2020, to reflect the following:
Revisions were made on May 29, 2020, to reflect the following:
Revisions were made on May 25, 2020, to reflect the following:
Revisions were made on May 20, 2020, to reflect the following:
Revisions were made on May 12, 2020, to reflect the following:
This interim guidance is for clinicians caring for patients with confirmed infection with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the virus that causes coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
CDC will update this interim guidance as more information becomes available.
The incubation period for COVID-19 is thought to extend to 14 days, with a median time of 4-5 days from exposure to symptoms onset.1-3 One study reported that 97.5% of persons with COVID-19 who develop symptoms will do so within 11.5 days of SARS-CoV-2 infection.3
The signs and symptoms of COVID-19 present at illness onset vary, but over the course of the disease, most persons with COVID-19 will experience the following1,4-9:
Symptoms differ with severity of disease.
For example, fever, cough, and shortness of breath are more commonly reported among people who are hospitalized with COVID-19 than among those with milder disease (non-hospitalized patients).
Atypical presentations occur often, and older adults and persons with medical comorbidities may have delayed presentation of fever and respiratory symptoms.10,14 In one study of 1,099 hospitalized patients, fever was present in only 44% at hospital admission but eventually developed in 89% during hospitalization.1 Fatigue, headache, and muscle aches (myalgia) are among the most commonly reported symptoms in people who are not hospitalized, and sore throat and nasal congestion or runny nose (rhinorrhea) also may be prominent symptoms.
Many people with COVID-19  experience gastrointestinal symptoms such as nausea, vomiting or diarrhea, sometimes prior to developing fever and lower respiratory tract signs and symptoms.9 Loss of smell (anosmia) or taste (ageusia) preceding the onset of respiratory symptoms has been commonly reported in COVID-19 especially among women and young or middle-aged patients who do not require hospitalization.11,12 While many of the symptoms of COVID-19 are common to other respiratory or viral illnesses, anosmia appears to be more specific to COVID-19.12
Several studies have reported that the signs Signs and symptoms of COVID-19 in children are similar to adults vary by age of the child,  and are usually milder compared to adults.15-19 For more information on the clinical presentation and course among children, see Information for Pediatric Healthcare Providers.
Several studies have documented SARS-CoV-2 infection in patients who never develop symptoms (asymptomatic) and in patients not yet symptomatic (pre-symptomatic).16,18,20-30 Since asymptomatic persons are not routinely tested, the prevalence of asymptomatic infection and detection of pre-symptomatic infection is not yet well understood.
One study found that as many as 13% of reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)-confirmed cases of SARS-CoV-2 infection in children were asymptomatic.16 Another study of skilled nursing facility residents who were infected with SARS-CoV-2 after contact with a healthcare worker with COVID-19 demonstrated that half of the residents were asymptomatic or pre-symptomatic at the time of contact tracing, evaluation, and testing.27 Patients may have abnormalities on chest imaging before the onset of symptoms.21,22.
Increasing numbers of epidemiologic studies have documented SARS-CoV-2 transmission during the pre-symptomatic incubation period,21,31-33.
Virologic studies using RT-PCR detection have reported tests with  low cycle thresholds, indicating larger quantities of viral RNA and viable virus has been cultured from persons with asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection.25,27,30,34 The relationship between SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA shedding and  transmission risk is not yet clear.
The proportion of SARS-CoV-2 transmission due to asymptomatic or pre-symptomatic infection compared to symptomatic infection is unclear.35
The largest cohort reported of &gt;44,000 persons with COVID-19 from China showed that illness severity can range from mild to critical:36
In this study, all deaths occurred among patients with critical illness, and the overall case fatality rate was 2.3%.36 The case fatality rate among patients with critical disease was 49%.36 Among children in China, illness severity was lower with 94% having asymptomatic, mild, or moderate disease; 5% having severe disease; and &lt;1% having critical disease.16 Among U.S. COVID-19 cases with known disposition, the proportion of persons who were hospitalized was 19%.37 The proportion of persons with COVID-19 admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) was 6%.37
Among patients who developed severe disease, the median time to dyspnea from the onset of illness or symptoms ranged from 5 to 8 days, the median time to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) from the onset of illness or symptoms ranged from 8 to 12 days, and the median time to ICU admission from the onset of illness or symptoms ranged from 10 to 12 days.5,6,10,11 Clinicians should be aware of the potential for some patients to rapidly deteriorate one week after illness onset.
Among all hospitalized patients, a range of 26% to 32% of patients were admitted to the ICU.6,8,11 Among all patients, a range of 3% to 17% developed ARDS compared to a range of 20% to 42% for hospitalized patients and 67% to 85% for patients admitted to the ICU.1,4-6,8,11 Mortality among patients admitted to the ICU ranges from 39% to 72% depending on the study and characteristics of patient population.5,8,10,11 The median length of hospitalization among survivors was 10 to 13 days.1,6,8
Age is a strong risk factor for severe illness, complications, and death.1,6,8,14,36-40 Among &gt;44,000 confirmed cases of COVID-19 in China, the case fatality rate was highest among older persons: ≥80 years, 14.8%; 70–79 years, 8.0%; 60–69 years, 3.6%; 50–59 years, 1.3%; 40–49 years, 0.4%; &lt;40 years, 0.2%.36,41 In early U.S. epidemiologic data, case fatality was highest in persons aged ≥85 years (range 10%–27%), followed by those aged 65-84 years (3%–11%), aged 55-64 years (1%–3%), and aged &lt;55 years (&lt;1%).37
Patients in China with no reported underlying medical conditions had an overall case fatality of 0.9%.
Case fatality was higher for patients with comorbidities: 10.5% for those with cardiovascular disease, 7.3% for those with diabetes, and approximately 6% for those with chronic respiratory disease, or cancer.1,6,14,36,38,41,42    Prior stroke, diabetes, chronic lung disease, and chronic kidney disease have all been associated with increased illness severity and adverse outcomes.
Serious heart conditions, including heart failure, coronary artery disease, congenital heart disease, cardiomyopathies, and pulmonary hypertension, may put people at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
People with hypertension may be at an increased risk for severe illness from COVID-19 and should continue to take their medications as prescribed.
At this time, people whose only underlying medical condition is hypertension are not considered to be at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.43,44
Accounting for differences in age and prevalence of underlying condition, mortality associated with COVID-19 reported in the United States has been similar to reports from China.26,37,39
There are limited data about reinfection with SARS-CoV-2 after recovery from COVID-19.​84, 85 While viral RNA shedding declines with resolution of symptoms, it may continue for days to weeks.34,38,45 However, the detection of RNA during convalescence does not necessarily indicate the presence of viable infectious virus.
Clinical infection has been correlated with the detection of IgM and IgG antibodies.46-49 However, definitive data are lacking, and it remains uncertain whether individuals with antibodies are protected against reinfection with SARS-CoV-2, and if so, what concentration of antibodies is needed to confer protection.
Diagnosis of COVID-19 requires detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
Detection of SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA is better in nasopharynx samples compared to throat samples.34,50 Lower respiratory samples may have better yield than upper respiratory samples.34,50 SARS-CoV-2 RNA has also been detected in stool and blood.15,45,47,51 Detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in blood may be a marker of severe illness.52 Viral RNA shedding may persist over longer periods among older persons and those who had severe illness requiring hospitalization (median range of viral shedding among hospitalized patients 12–20 days).34,38,45,46,53
Infection with both SARS-CoV-2 and with other respiratory viruses has been reported, and detection of another respiratory pathogen does not rule out COVID-19.54
For more information about testing and specimen collection, handling and storage, visit Evaluating and Testing Persons for Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) and Frequently Asked Questions on COVID-19 Testing at Laboratories.
Lymphopenia is the most common laboratory finding in COVID-19, and is found in as many as 83% of hospitalized patients.1,5 Lymphopenia, neutrophilia, elevated serum alanine aminotransferase and aspartate aminotransferase levels, elevated lactate dehydrogenase, high CRP, and high ferritin levels may be associated with greater illness severity.1,5,6,8,38,55 Elevated D-dimer and lymphopenia have been associated with mortality.8,38 Procalcitonin is typically normal on admission, but may increase among those admitted to an ICU.4-6 Patients with critical illness had high plasma levels of inflammatory makers, suggesting potential immune dysregulation.5,56
Chest radiographs of patients with COVID-19 typically demonstrate bilateral air-space consolidation, though patients may have unremarkable chest radiographs early in the disease.1,5,57 Chest CT images from patients with COVID-19 typically demonstrate bilateral, peripheral ground glass opacities.4,8,36,58-67 Because this chest CT imaging pattern is non-specific and overlaps with other infections, the diagnostic value of chest CT imaging for COVID-19 may be low and dependent upon radiographic interpretation.59,68 One study found that 56% of patients who presented within two days of diagnosis had a normal CT.60 Conversely, other studies have identified chest CT abnormalities in patients prior to the detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA.58,69 Given the variability in chest imaging findings, chest radiograph or CT alone is not recommended for the diagnosis of COVID-19.
The American College of Radiology also does not recommend CT for screening, or as a first-line test for diagnosis of COVID-19.
(See American College of Radiology Recommendationsexternal icon).
The National Institutes of Health published guidelines on prophylaxis use, testing, and management of patients with COVID-19.
For more information, please visit National Institutes of Health: Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Treatment Guidelinesexternal icon.
The recommendations were based on scientific evidence and expert opinion and will be updated as more data become available.
Patients with a mild clinical presentation (absence of viral pneumonia and hypoxia) may not initially require hospitalization, and many patients will be able to manage their illness at home.
The decision to monitor a patient in the inpatient or outpatient setting should be made on a case-by-case basis.
This decision will depend on the clinical presentation, requirement for supportive care, potential risk factors for severe disease, and the ability of the patient to self-isolate at home.
Patients with risk factors for severe illness (see People Who Are at Higher Risk for Severe Illness) should be monitored closely given the possible risk of progression to severe illness, especially in the second week after symptom onset.5,6,14,38
For information regarding infection prevention and control recommendations, please see Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) or Persons Under Investigation for COVID-19 in Healthcare Settings.
Some patients with COVID-19 will have severe disease requiring hospitalization for management.
Inpatient management revolves around the supportive management of the most common complications of severe COVID-19: pneumonia, hypoxemic respiratory failure/ARDS, sepsis and septic shock, cardiomyopathy and arrhythmia, acute kidney injury, and complications from prolonged hospitalization, including secondary bacterial infections, thromboembolism, gastrointestinal bleeding, and critical illness polyneuropathy/myopathy.1,4-6,14,36,38,70-73
More information can be found at National Institutes of Health: Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Treatment Guidelinesexternal icon and Healthcare Professionals: Frequently Asked Questions and Answers.
Additional resources and guidance documents on the treatment and management of COVID-19, including inpatient management of critically ill patients, are provided below.
Some patients with COVID-19 may develop signs of a hypercoagulable state and be at increased risk for venous and arterial thrombosis of large and small vessels.74,75  Laboratory abnormalities commonly observed among hospitalized patients with COVID-19-associated coagulopathy include:
Elevated D-dimer levels have been strongly associated with greater risk of death.74,76-79
There are several reports of hospitalized patients with thrombotic complications, most frequently deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism.80-82 Other reported manifestations include:
The pathogenesis for COVID-19-associated hypercoagulability remains unknown.
However, hypoxia and systemic inflammation secondary to COVID-19 may lead to high levels of inflammatory cytokines and activation of the coagulation pathway.
There are limited data available to inform clinical management around prophylaxis or treatment of venous thromboembolism in COVID-19 patients.
Several national professional associations provide resources for up-to-date information concerning COVID-19-associated hypercoagulability, including management of anticoagulation.
This is a rapidly evolving topic, with new information released often.
More information on hypercoagulability and COVID-19 is available from the American Society of Hematology external iconand National Institutes of Health: Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Treatment Guidelines – Antithrombotic Therapy in Patients with COVID-19external icon.
Illness among pediatric patients with COVID-19 is typically milder than among adults.
Most children present with symptoms of upper respiratory infection.
However, severe outcomes have been reported in children, including deaths.
Data suggest that infants (&lt;12 months of age) may be at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 compared with older children.16 CDC and partners are also investigating reports of multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) associated with COVID-19.
For expanded guidance on the management of children with COVID-19 and associated complications, see Evaluation and Management Considerations for Neonates At Risk for COVID-19, Information for Pediatric Healthcare Providers, and the Surviving Sepsis Campaign International Guidelines for the Management of Septic Shock and Sepsis-Associated Organ Dysfunction in Childrenexternal icon.
The National Institutes of Health have published interim guidelines for the medical management of COVID-19external icon which include information on therapeutic options for COVID-19 currently under investigation.
No U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved drugs have demonstrated safety and efficacy in randomized controlled trials when used to treat patients with COVID-19, although FDA has granted an Emergency Use Authorization for the use of remdesivirexternal icon to treat severe cases.
Use of investigational therapies for treatment of COVID-19 should ideally be done in the context of enrollment in randomized controlled trials, so that beneficial drugs can be identified.
For the latest information, see Information for Clinicians on Therapeutic Options for COVID-19 Patients.
For information on registered trials in the United States, see ClinicalTrials.govexternal icon.
Patients who have clinically recovered and are able to discharge from the hospital, but who have not been cleared from their Transmission-Based Precautions, may continue isolation at their place of residence until cleared.
For recommendations on discontinuation of Transmission-Based Precautions or home isolation for patients who have recovered from COVID-19, please see:
There are no drugs or other therapeutics presently approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to prevent or treat COVID-19.
Current clinical management includes infection prevention and control measures and supportive care, including supplemental oxygen and mechanical ventilatory support when indicated.
The National Institutes of Health have published interim guidelines for the medical management of COVID-19external icon prepared by the COVID-19 Treatment Guidelines Panel.
These guidelines contain information about investigational therapeutics and will be updated as new information emerges and drugs and other therapeutic interventions are approved for use by FDA.
Persons seeking information about registered clinical trials for COVID-19 in the United States can search for such information here: ClinicalTrials.govexternal icon.
CDC guidance for COVID-19 may be adapted by state and local health departments to respond to rapidly changing local circumstances.
Healthcare providers and public health officials managing persons with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) under isolation who are not in healthcare settings.
This includes, but is not limited to, at home, in a hotel or dormitory room, or in a group isolation facility.
For Hospitalized Patients, see (Discontinuation of Transmission-Based Precautions and Disposition of Patients with COVID-19 in Healthcare Settings (Interim Guidance).
Updates as of July 20, 2020
A summary of current evidence and rationale for these changes is described in the Duration of Isolation and Precautions for Adults with COVID-19.
The CDC is learning more about COVID-19 every day, and as new information becomes available, CDC will update the information below.
This guidance is based on available information about COVID-19 and is subject to change as additional information becomes available.
The approach outlined below may differ from that recommended for healthcare personnel or patients in healthcare settings with COVID-19 due to different susceptibilities and risks associated with onward transmission in a healthcare setting.
Accumulating evidence supports ending isolation and precautions for persons with COVID-19 using a symptom-based strategy.
Specifically, researchers have reported that people with mild to moderate COVID-19 remain infectious no longer than 10 days after their symptoms began, and those with more severe illness or those who are severely immunocompromised remain infectious no longer than 20 days after their symptoms began.
Therefore, CDC has updated the recommendations for discontinuing home isolation as follows:
Persons with COVID-19 who have symptoms and were directed to care for themselves at home may discontinue isolation under the following conditions:
*A limited number of persons with severe illness may produce replication-competent virus beyond 10 days, that may warrant extending duration of isolation for up to 20 days after symptom onset.
Consider consultation with infection control experts.
See Discontinuation of Transmission-Based Precautions and Disposition of Patients with COVID-19 in Healthcare Settings (Interim Guidance).
Persons infected with SARS-CoV-2 who never develop COVID-19 symptoms may discontinue isolation and other precautions 10 days after the date of their first positive RT-PCR test for SARS-CoV-2 RNA.
RT-PCR testing for detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA for discontinuing isolation could be considered for persons who are severely immunocompromised1, in consultation with infectious disease experts.
For all others, a test-based strategy is no longer recommended except to discontinue isolation or other precautions earlier than would occur under the symptom-based strategy outlined above.
The test-based strategy requires negative results using RT-PCR for detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA under an FDA Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) for COVID-19 from at least two consecutive respiratory specimens collected ≥24 hours apart (total of two negative specimens).† See Interim Guidelines for Collecting, Handling, and Testing Clinical Specimens from Persons for Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
†All test results should be final before isolation is ended.
Testing guidance is based on limited information and is subject to change as more information becomes available.
Note that recommendations for discontinuing isolation in persons known to be infected with SARS-CoV-2 could, in some circumstances, appear to conflict with recommendations on when to discontinue quarantine for persons known to have been exposed to SARS-CoV-2.
CDC recommends 14 days of quarantine after exposure based on the time it takes to develop illness if infected.
Thus, it is possible that a person known to be infected could leave isolation earlier than a person who is quarantined because of the possibility they are infected.
These recommendations will prevent most, but cannot prevent all, instances of secondary spread.
The best available evidence suggests that recovered persons can continue to shed detectable SARS-CoV-2 RNA in upper respiratory specimens for up to 3 months after illness onset, albeit at concentrations considerably lower than during illness, in ranges where replication-competent virus has not been reliably recovered and infectiousness is unlikely.
Studies have not found evidence that clinically recovered persons with persistence of viral RNA have transmitted SARS-CoV-2 to others.
*All test results should be final before isolation is ended.
Testing guidance is based upon limited information and is subject to change as more information becomes available.
In persons with a persistent productive cough, SARS-CoV-2-RNA might be detected for longer periods in sputum specimens than in respiratory specimens.
Updates as of July 17, 2020
Updates as of May 29, 2020
Added information around the management of persons who may have prolonged viral shedding after recovery.
Updates as of May 3, 2020
Updates as of April 4, 2020
1 The studies used to inform this guidance did not clearly define severely immunocompromised.
For the purposes of this guidance, CDC used the following definition:
Printer friendly version pdf iconPDF
This interim guidance is for staff at local and state health departments, infection prevention and control professionals, and healthcare personnel who are coordinating the home care and isolation1 of people with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 infection, including persons under investigation (see Criteria to Guide Evaluation of Persons Under Investigation (PUI) for COVID-19).
This includes patients evaluated in an outpatient setting who do not require hospitalization (i.e patients who are medically stable and can receive care at home) or patients who are discharged home following a hospitalization with confirmed COVID-19 infection.
In general, people should adhere to home isolation until the risk of secondary transmission is thought to be low.
Visit the Preventing the Spread of Coronavirus Disease 2019 in Homes and Residential Communities page for more information.
Preventing COVID-19 from Spreading in Homes and Communities: Interim guidance that may help prevent COVID-19 from spreading among people in homes and in communities.
This document does not apply to patients in healthcare settings.
For interim healthcare infection prevention and control recommendations, see Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Known or Persons Under Investigation forCoronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in a Healthcare Setting.
CDC will update this interim guidance as needed and as more information becomes available.
In consultation with state or local health department staff, a healthcare professional should assess whether the residential setting is appropriate for home care.
Considerations for care at home include whether:
1Isolation is defined as the separation or restriction of activities of an ill person with a contagious disease from those who are well.
CDC guidance for SARS-CoV-2 infection may be adapted by state and local health departments to respond to rapidly changing local circumstances.
Summary of Recent Changes as of August 10, 2020 to more closely align guidance with Decision Memo:
The decision to discontinue Transmission-Based Precautions for patients with confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection should be made using a symptom-based strategy as described below.
The time period used depends on the patients severity of illness and if they are severely immunocompromised.1 Meeting criteria for discontinuation of Transmission-Based Precautions is not a prerequisite for discharge from a healthcare facility.
A test-based strategy is no longer recommended (except as noted below) because, in the majority of cases, it results in prolonged isolation of patients who continue to shed detectable SARS-CoV-2 RNA but are no longer infectious.
Symptom-Based Strategy for Discontinuing Transmission-Based Precautions.
Patients with mild to moderate illness who are not severely immunocompromised:
Note:  For patients who are not severely immunocompromised1 and who were asymptomatic throughout their infection, Transmission-Based Precautions may be discontinued when at least 10 days have passed since the date of their first positive viral diagnostic test.
Patients with severe to critical illness or who are severely immunocompromised1:
Note:  For severely immunocompromised1 patients who were asymptomatic throughout their infection, Transmission-Based Precautions may be discontinued when at least 10 days and up to 20 days have passed since the date of their first positive viral diagnostic test.
As described in the Decision Memo, an estimated 95% of severely or critically ill patients, including some with severe immunocompromise,  no longer had replication-competent virus 15 days after onset of symptoms; no patients had replication-competent virus more than 20 days after onset of symptoms.
The exact criteria that determine which patients will shed replication-competent virus for longer periods are not known.
Disease severity factors and the presence of immunocompromising conditions should be considered in determining the appropriate duration for specific patient populations.
For example, patients with characteristics of severe illness may be most appropriately managed with at least 15 days of isolation under Transmission-Based Precautions.
Test-Based Strategy for Discontinuing Transmission-Based Precautions.
In some instances, a test-based strategy could be considered for discontinuing Transmission-based Precautions earlier than if the symptom-based strategy were used.
However, as described in the Decision Memo, many individuals will have prolonged viral shedding, limiting the utility of this approach.
A test-based strategy could also be considered for some patients (e.g those who are severely immunocompromised1) in consultation with local infectious diseases experts if concerns exist for the patient being infectious for more than 20 days.
The criteria for the test-based strategy are:
The decision to discontinue empiric Transmission-Based Precautions by excluding the diagnosis of current SARS-CoV-2 infection for a patient with suspected SARS-CoV-2 infection can be made based upon having negative results from at least one respiratory specimen tested using an FDA-authorized molecular viral assay to detect SARS-CoV-2 RNA.
Ultimately, clinical judgement and suspicion of SARS-CoV-2 infection determine whether to continue or discontinue empiric Transmission-Based Precautions.
Patients can be discharged from the healthcare facility whenever clinically indicated.
If discharged to a nursing home or other long-term care facility (e.g assisted living facility), AND
Note:  The studies used to inform this guidance did not clearly define severe or critical illness.
This guidance has taken a conservative approach to define these categories.
Although not developed to inform decisions about duration of Transmission-Based Precautions, the definitions in the National Institutes of Health (NIH) COVID-19 Treatment Guidelinesexternal icon are one option for defining severity of illness categories.
The highest level of illness severity experienced by the patient at any point in their clinical course should be used when determining the duration of Transmission-Based Precautions.
Mild Illness: Individuals who have any of the various signs and symptoms of COVID-19 (e.g fever, cough, sore throat, malaise, headache, muscle pain) without shortness of breath, dyspnea, or abnormal chest imaging.
Moderate Illness: Individuals who have evidence of lower respiratory disease by clinical assessment or imaging, and a saturation of oxygen (SpO2) ≥94% on room air at sea level.
Severe Illness: Individuals who have respiratory frequency &gt;30 breaths per minute, SpO2 &lt;94% on room air at sea level (or, for patients with chronic hypoxemia, a decrease from baseline of &gt;3%), ratio of arterial partial pressure of oxygen to fraction of inspired oxygen (PaO2/FiO2) &lt;300 mmHg, or lung infiltrates &gt;50%.
Critical Illness: Individuals who have respiratory failure, septic shock, and/or multiple organ dysfunction.
In pediatric patients, radiographic abnormalities are common and, for the most part, should not be used as the sole criteria to define COVID-19 illness category.
Normal values for respiratory rate also vary with age in children, thus hypoxia should be the primary criterion to define severe illness, especially in younger children.
1The studies used to inform this guidance did not clearly define severely immunocompromised.
For the purposes of this guidance, CDC used the following definition:
Revisions were made on August 14, 2020 to reflect new evidence about COVID-19 in children.
This guidance is intended to inform pediatric healthcare providers of up-to-date information about children with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 and about caring for children during the pandemic.
Children are defined as age 1 month to 18 years for the purpose of this document.
For healthcare providers caring for neonates (≤28 days old) with suspected or confirmed  COVID-19, including those born to a mother with suspected or confirmed COVID-19, please refer to CDC guidance for evaluating and managing neonates at risk for COVID-19.
In the United States and globally, fewer cases of COVID-19 have been reported in children (age 0-17 years) compared with  adults.1,2 While children comprise 22% of the US population,3 recent data show that 7.3% of all cases of COVID-19 in the United States reported to CDC were among children (as of August 3rd, 2020).4  The number and rate of cases in children in the United States have been steadily increasing from March to July 2020.
The true incidence of SARS-CoV-2 infection in children is not known due to lack of widespread testing and the prioritization of testing for adults and those with severe illness.
Hospitalization rates in children are significantly lower than hospitalization rates in adults with COVID-19, suggesting that children may have less severe illness from COVID-19 compared to adults.5, 6 Visit CDCs Cases, Data, and Surveillance page for current CDC data.
It is unclear whether children are as susceptible to infection by SARS-CoV-2 compared with adults and whether they can transmit the virus as effectively as adults.
Recent evidence suggests that children likely have the same or higher viral loads in their nasopharynx compared with adults7 and that children can spread the virus effectively in households and camp settings.8,9
Due to community mitigation measures and school closures, transmission of SARS-CoV-2 to and among children may have been reduced in the United States during the pandemic in the spring and early summer of 2020.
This may explain the low incidence in children compared with adults.
Comparing trends in pediatric infections before and after the return to in-person school and other activities may provide additional understanding about infections in children.
The incubation period of SARS-CoV-2 appears to be about the same for children as in adults, at 2-14 days with an average of 6 days.10 
Signs or symptoms of COVID-19 in children include:
Children infected with SARS-CoV-2 may have many of these non-specific symptoms, may only have a few (such as only upper respiratory symptoms or only gastrointestinal symptoms), or may be asymptomatic.
The most common symptoms in children are cough and/or fever.11-15 A recent systematic review estimated that 16% of children with SARS-CoV-2 infection are asymptomatic,16 but evidence suggests that as many as 45% of pediatric infections are asymptomatic.17 The signs and symptoms of COVID-19 in children are similar to other infections and noninfectious processes, including influenza, streptococcal pharyngitis, and allergic rhinitis.
The lack of specificity of signs or symptoms and the significant proportion of asymptomatic infections make symptom-based screening for identification of SARS-CoV-2 in children particularly challenging.17
While children infected with SARS-CoV-2 are less likely to develop severe illness compared with adults, children are still at risk of developing severe illness and complications from COVID-19.
Recent COVID-19 hospitalization surveillance data shows that the rate of hospitalization among children is low (8.0 per 100,000 population) compared with that in adults (164.5 per 100,000 population), but hospitalization rates in children are increasing.
5  While children have lower rates of mechanical ventilation and death than adults, 1 in 3 children hospitalized with COVID-19 in the United States were admitted to the intensive care unit, which is the same in adults.5   
Current evidence suggests that children with certain underlying medical conditions and infants (age &lt;1 year) might be at increased risk for severe illness from SARS-CoV-2 infection.10,11,14 Of the children who have developed severe illness from COVID-19, most have had underlying medical conditions.
5 
Similar to adults, children with severe COVID-19 may develop respiratory failure, myocarditis, shock, acute renal failure, coagulopathy, and multi-organ system failure.
Some children with COVID-19 have developed other serious problems like intussusception or diabetic ketoacidosis.10,14, 20,21 Children infected with SARS-CoV-2 are also at risk for developing multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C).22 For the case definition, recommended evaluation, and current data on MIS-C cases in the United States, visit MIS-C Information for Healthcare Providers.
Viral tests (nucleic acid or antigen) are recommended to diagnose acute infection with SARS-CoV-2.
Testing strategies, including clinical criteria for considering testing and recommended specimen type, are the same for children and adults.
CDCs guidance for the evaluation and management of neonates at risk for COVID-19 details specific testing considerations for newborns.
For more information on CDCs recommendations for isolation, which apply to children and adults, visit: discontinuing precautions and disposition of patients with COVID-19 in healthcare settings and discontinuation of home isolation for people not in healthcare settings.
As children return to school and other in-person activities, pediatric healthcare providers should be prepared to answer questions from families about testing and when it is safe to return to school or be with people outside the household.
Review CDCs information for school administrators on symptom screening and testing for children in school as well as CDCs Community Mitigation framework.
School-aged children should be prioritized for viral testing if they have:
Children with symptoms of an infectious disease should not attend school, but the length of time the child should stay home depends on the most likely etiology of illness (COVID-19 or not).
Return to school policies for children with COVID-19 should be based on CDCs recommendation for discontinuation of home isolation.
A negative test or doctors note should not be required for return to school upon completion of the 10 days of isolation with improvement of symptoms.
Typical laboratory findings in children with COVID-19 include mild abnormalities in white blood cell count (either increased or decreased lymphocyte counts), mildly elevated inflammatory markers (including procalcitonin), and mildly elevated liver enzymes.23 Radiologic findings in children with COVID-19 include unilateral or bilateral infiltrates on chest radiograph or CT, ground-glass opacities on CT, and consolidation with surrounding Halo sign on CT.23,24 CT should be used sparingly and only for hospitalized, symptomatic patients with specific clinical indications.
For more information, see recommendations from the American College of Radiologyexternal icon.
Pediatric healthcare providers should consider the childs clinical presentation, requirement for supportive care, underlying medical conditions, and the ability for caregivers to care for the child at home when deciding whether the child may need inpatient care for COVID-19.
For more information, visit Guidance for home care of people not requiring hospitalization for Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Provide parents resources on emergency warning signs for COVID-19 and caring for someone at home.
Currently, there are no specific drugs approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for treatment of COVID-19.
Treatment of COVID-19 remains largely supportive and includes prevention and management of complications.
Remdesivirexternal icon, which has shown benefits in clinical trials in adults, is currently available through Emergency Use Authorization or compassionate use programs for children.
The safety and effectiveness of remdesivir for treatment of COVID-19 has not yet been evaluated in children.
Additionally, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) suggests that dexamethasoneexternal icon may be beneficial in pediatric patients with COVID-19 respiratory disease who are on mechanical ventilation.
For more information, review considerations for childrenexternal icon in NIHs COVID-19 Treatment Guidelines.25
For information on evaluation and management of MIS-C, visit MIS-C Information for Healthcare Providers.
It is important to remember that children infected with SARS-CoV-2 can present with other serious conditions such as  diabetic ketoacidosis or intussusception, and a broad differential must be maintained in evaluating ill children during the COVID-19 pandemic.10,14,20,21,26-29 Standard evaluation and management of co-occurring conditions should be maintained for a child infected with SARS-CoV-2, with additional infection control measures.
Pediatric providers should have an appropriate suspicion for COVID-19, but also to continue to consider and test for other diagnoses, such as community acquired pneumoniaexternal icon and influenza (see CDCs Flu Information for Healthcare Professionals for more information).
CDC has specific guidance for inpatient obstetric healthcare settings and the evaluation and management of neonates at risk for COVID-19.
Additionally, several other organizations have published guidelines related to the treatment and management of adult and pediatric patients with COVID-19:
Community mitigation measures such as shelter-in-place orders resulted in declines in outpatient pediatric visits and fewer vaccine doses administered during the early COVID-19 pandemic,30 leaving children at risk for vaccine-preventable diseases.
Healthcare providers should work with families to keep children up to date with all recommended vaccinations, especially with influenza vaccinations for the 2020-2021 influenza season.
For more information on influenza, visit CDCs Influenza page.
For more information on immunization services and vaccination recommendations during the pandemic, visit Vaccination Guidance.
Healthcare providers should identify children who have missed well-child visits and/or recommended vaccinations and contact them to schedule in-person appointments, with prioritization of infants, children age &lt; 24 months and school-aged children.
Developmental surveillance and early childhood screenings, including developmental and autism screening, should continue along with referrals for early intervention services and further evaluation if concerns are identified.
All newborns should be seen by a pediatric healthcare provider shortly after hospital discharge (three to five days of age).
Ideally, newborn visits should be done in-person, even during the COVID-19 pandemic, to evaluate feeding and weight gain, check for dehydration and jaundice, ensure all components of newborn screening were completed with appropriate confirmatory testing and follow-up, and evaluate maternal well-being.
All healthcare facilities should ensure infection prevention and control policies are in place to minimize chance of exposure to SARS-CoV-2 among providers, patients, and families.
For specific recommendations by healthcare facility type and level of community transmission, review Infection Control Guidance for Healthcare Professionals.
CDC has additional trainings and information about potential exposures in the workplace for healthcare providers.
Pediatric healthcare providers should incorporate education on everyday infection prevention measures, such as the importance of proper hand hygiene, social distancing, and wearing masks when in public, as well as information on stress and coping during the pandemic in their regular anticipatory guidance with children and their families.
Pediatric healthcare providers should educate patients and families about infection prevention policies that exist in clinics, emergency departments, hospitals, and clinics.
Remind people to seek emergency care immediately, if indicated, as delaying care may cause harm.
Primary care practices should continue to use infection prevention strategies including:
Revisions were made on May 20, 2020, to reflect the following:
These infection prevention and control considerations are for healthcare facilities providing obstetric care for pregnant patients with suspected1 or confirmed coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in inpatient obstetric healthcare settings including obstetrical triage, labor and delivery, recovery and inpatient postpartum settings.
This information is intended to aid hospitals and clinicians in applying broader CDC interim guidance on infection prevention and control for COVID-19.
Since maternity and newborn care units vary in physical configuration, each facility should consider their appropriate space and staffing needs to prevent transmission of the virus that causes COVID-19.
These considerations include appropriate isolation of pregnant patients who have suspected1 or confirmed COVID-19; basic and refresher training for all healthcare personnel on those units to include correct adherence to infection control practices and personal protective equipment (PPE) use and handling; and sufficient and appropriate PPE supplies positioned at all points of care.
These considerations are based upon the limited evidence available to date about transmission of the virus that causes COVID-19.
The approaches outlined below are intentionally cautious until additional data become available to refine recommendations for prevention of person-to-person transmission in inpatient obstetric care settings.
Based on what we know at this time, pregnant people might be at an increased risk for severe illness from COVID-19 compared to non-pregnant people.
Additionally, there may be an increased risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes, such as preterm birth, among pregnant people with COVID-19.
CDC has developed recommendations for healthcare providers caring for neonates (newborns) at risk for COVID-19, including testing and infection prevention and control considerations, as well as guidance for care of breastfeeding mothers.
For more information, visit Evaluation and Management Considerations for Neonates At Risk for COVID-19 and Guidance on Care for Breastfeeding Women.
Patients with COVID-19 can be discharged from the healthcare facility whenever clinically indicated.
For more information, see Discontinuation of Transmission-Based Precautions and Disposition of Patients with COVID-19 in Healthcare Settings.
Meeting criteria for discontinuation of Transmission-Based Precautions is not a prerequisite for discharge.
Patients who are able to be discharged from the hospital but have not met criteria to discontinue isolation and wish to reduce the risk of transmission to their newborn may continue temporary separation at their place of residence (if feasible) until cleared to discontinue home isolation following either the symptom based strategy or testing based strategy.
When temporary separation is being considered, its risks and benefits should be discussed by the mother and the healthcare team.
Decisions about temporary separation should be made in accordance with the mothers wishes.
For more information, refer to guidance in the Discontinuation of Home Isolation for Persons with COVID-19.
People who are caring for infants and young children may experience increased stress, feelings of isolation, or loneliness because of social distancing measures during the COVID-19 outbreak or related temporary separation.
Postpartum depression symptoms may be worsened because of COVID-19 social distancing measures.
Providers are encourage to share resources with patients about coping with stress during the COVID-19 pandemic.
1 For the purpose of obstetric care, a suspected COVID-19 case is someone who has symptoms of COVID-19, or has had a recent high risk contact (such as a family member at home with COVID-19) and does not have a negative test result (either because no test was done or because the test is still pending).
Some facilities may choose to test all patients regardless of symptoms or known exposure as part of a universal testing protocol.
Regardless of pending test results, pregnant individuals who are asymptomatic at the time of admission and have no history of high risk contact should not be considered to be suspected cases.
Below are changes to the guidance as of July 15, 2020:
This interim guidance has been updated based on currently available information about COVID-19 and the current situation in the United States.
As healthcare facilities begin to relax restrictions on healthcare services provided to patients (e.g restarting elective procedures), in accordance with guidance from local and state officials, there are precautions that should remain in place as a part of the ongoing response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Most recommendations in this updated guidance are not new (except as noted in the summary of changes above); they have been reorganized into the following sections:
This guidance is applicable to all U.S. healthcare settings.
This guidance is not intended for non-healthcare settings (e.g schools) OR for persons outside of healthcare settings.
For information regarding modes of transmission, clinical management, air or ground medical transport, or laboratory settings, refer to the COVID-19 website.
CDC recommends using additional infection prevention and control practices during the COVID-19 pandemic, along with standard practices recommended as a part of routine healthcare delivery to all patients.
These practices are intended to apply to all patients, not just those with suspected or confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection (See Section 2 for additional practices that should be used when caring for patients with suspected or confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection).
Implement Telehealth and Nurse-Directed Triage Protocols
Screen and Triage Everyone Entering a Healthcare Facility for Signs and Symptoms of COVID-19
Although screening for symptoms will not identify asymptomatic or pre-symptomatic individuals with SARS-CoV-2 infection, symptom screening remains an important strategy to identify those who could have COVID-19 so appropriate precautions can be implemented.
Re-evaluate admitted patients for signs and symptoms of COVID-19
While screening should be performed upon entry to the facility, it should also be incorporated into daily assessments of all admitted patients.
All fevers and symptoms consistent with COVID-19 among admitted patients should be properly managed and evaluated (e.g place any patient with unexplained fever or symptoms of COVID-19 on appropriate Transmission-Based Precautions and evaluate).
Source control refers to use of cloth face coverings or facemasks to cover a persons mouth and nose to prevent spread of respiratory secretions when they are talking, sneezing, or coughing.
Because of the potential for asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic transmission, source control measures are recommended for everyone in a healthcare facility, even if they do not have symptoms of COVID-19.
Healthcare delivery requires close physical contact between patients and HCP.
However, when possible, physical distancing (maintaining 6 feet between people) is an important strategy to prevent SARS-CoV-2 transmission.
Examples of how physical distancing can be implemented for patients include:
For HCP, the potential for exposure to SARS-CoV-2 is not limited to direct patient care interactions.
Transmission can also occur through unprotected exposures to asymptomatic or pre-symptomatic co-workers in breakrooms or co-workers or visitors in other common areas.
Examples of how physical distancing can be implemented for HCP include:
Implement Universal Use of Personal Protective Equipment
Consider Performing Targeted SARS-CoV-2 Testing of Patients Without Signs or Symptoms of COVID-19
In addition to the use of universal PPE and source control in healthcare settings, targeted SARS-CoV-2 testing of patients without signs or symptoms of COVID-19 might be used to identify those with asymptomatic or pre-symptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection and further reduce risk for exposures in some healthcare settings.
Depending on guidance from local and state health departments, testing availability, and how rapidly results are available, facilities can consider implementing pre-admission or pre-procedure diagnostic testing with authorized nucleic acid or antigen detection assays for SARS-CoV-2.
Testing results might inform decisions about rescheduling elective procedures or about the need for additional Transmission-Based Precautions when caring for the patient.
Limitations of using this testing strategy include obtaining negative results in patients during their incubation period who later become infectious and false negative test results, depending on the test method used.
Consider if elective procedures, surgeries, and non-urgent outpatient visits should be postponed in certain circumstances.
Facilities must balance the need to provide necessary services while minimizing risk to patients and HCP.
Facilities should consider the potential for patient harm if care is deferred when making decisions about providing elective procedures, surgeries, and non-urgent outpatient visits.
Refer to the Framework for Healthcare Systems Providing Non-COVID-19 Clinical Care During the COVID-19 Pandemic for additional guidance.
Optimize the Use of Engineering Controls and Indoor Air Quality
Create a Process to Respond to SARS-CoV-2 Exposures Among HCP and Others
Healthcare facilities should have a process for notifying the health department about suspected or confirmed cases of SARS-CoV-2 infection, and should establish a plan, in consultation with local public health authorities, for how exposures in a healthcare facility will be investigated and managed and how contact tracing will be performed.
The plan should address the following:
Contact tracing should be carried out in a way that protects the confidentiality of affected individuals and is consistent with applicable laws and regulations.
HCP and patients who are currently admitted to the facility or were transferred to another healthcare facility should be prioritized for notification.
These groups, if infected, have the potential to expose a large number of individuals at higher risk for severe disease, or in the situation of admitted patients, are at higher risk for severe illness themselves.
Information about when HCP with suspected or confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection may return to work is available in the Interim Guidance on Criteria for Return to Work for Healthcare Personnel with Confirmed or Suspected COVID-19.
Information about risk assessment and work restrictions for HCP exposed to SARS-CoV-2 is available in the Interim U.S.
Guidance for Risk Assessment and Work Restrictions for Healthcare Personnel with Potential Exposure to Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Healthcare facilities must be prepared for potential staffing shortages and have plans and processes in place to mitigate these, including providing resources to assist HCP with anxiety and stress.
Strategies to mitigate staffing shortages are available.
Establish Reporting within and between Healthcare Facilities and to Public Health Authorities
Download the  Print-only PDFpdf icon
HCP who enter the room of a patient with suspected or confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection should adhere to Standard Precautions and use a NIOSH-approved N95 or equivalent or higher-level respirator (or facemask if a respirator is not available), gown, gloves, and eye protection.
When available, respirators (instead of facemasks) are preferred; they should be prioritized for situations where respiratory protection is most important and the care of patients with pathogens requiring Airborne Precautions (e.g tuberculosis, measles, varicella).
Information about the recommended duration of Transmission-Based Precautions is available in the Interim Guidance for Discontinuation of Transmission-Based Precautions and Disposition of Hospitalized Patients with COVID-19.
Any reusable PPE must be properly cleaned, decontaminated, and maintained after and between uses.
Facilities should have policies and procedures describing a recommended sequence for safely donning and doffing PPE.
The PPE recommended when caring for a patient with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 includes the following:
Facilities should work with their health department and healthcare coalitionexternal icon to address shortages of PPE.
Manage Visitor Access and Movement Within the Facility
Information about Airborne Infection Isolation Rooms (AIIRs):
Filtering Facepiece Respirators (FFR) including N95 Respirators
Healthcare Personnel (HCP): HCP refers to all paid and unpaid persons serving in healthcare settings who have the potential for direct or indirect exposure to patients or infectious materials, including body substances (e.g blood, tissue, and specific body fluids); contaminated medical supplies, devices, and equipment; contaminated environmental surfaces; or contaminated air.
HCP include, but are not limited to, emergency medical service personnel, nurses, nursing assistants, physicians, technicians, therapists, phlebotomists, pharmacists, students and trainees, contractual staff not employed by the healthcare facility, and persons not directly involved in patient care, but who could be exposed to infectious agents that can be transmitted in the healthcare setting (e.g clerical, dietary, environmental services, laundry, security, engineering and facilities management, administrative, billing, and volunteer personnel).
Source Control: Use of cloth face coverings or facemasks to cover a persons mouth and nose to prevent spread of respiratory secretions when they are talking, sneezing, or coughing.
Facemasks and cloth face coverings should not be placed on children under age 2, anyone who has trouble breathing, or anyone who is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Cloth face covering: Textile (cloth) covers that are intended for source control.
They are not personal protective equipment (PPE) and it is uncertain whether cloth face coverings protect the wearer.
Guidance on design, use, and maintenance of cloth face coverings is available.
Facemask: Facemasks are PPE and are often referred to as surgical masks or procedure masks.
Use facemasks according to product labeling and local, state, and federal requirements.
FDA-cleared surgical masks are designed to protect against splashes and sprays and are prioritized for use when such exposures are anticipated, including surgical procedures.
Facemasks that are not regulated by FDA, such as some procedure masks, which are typically used for isolation purposes, may not provide protection against splashes and sprays.
Respirator: A respirator is a personal protective device that is worn on the face, covers at least the nose and mouth, and is used to reduce the wearers risk of inhaling hazardous airborne particles (including dust particles and infectious agents), gases, or vapors.
Respirators are certified by the CDC/NIOSH, including those intended for use in healthcare.
Refer to the Appendix for a summary of different types of respirators.
Substantial community transmission: Large scale community transmission, including communal settings (e.g schools, workplaces)
Minimal to moderate community transmission: Sustained transmission with high likelihood or confirmed exposure within communal settings and potential for rapid increase in cases
No to minimal community transmission: Evidence of isolated cases or limited community transmission, case investigations underway; no evidence of exposure in large communal setting
Updated on June 9, 2020 to add a statement about the importance of the selected respirator and eye protection not interfering with the correct fit or function of the other, and remove a second hand hygiene step from step 6 in How to Put On (Don) PPE Gear.
check circle solid icon Patients with confirmed or possible SARS-CoV-2 infection should wear a facemask when being evaluated medically
check circle solid icon Healthcare personnel should adhere to Standard and Transmission-based Precautions when caring for patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Recommended PPE is described in the Infection Control Guidance
U.S. Healthcare Facilities: Optimize the Supply of PPE and Equipment
More than one donning method may be acceptable.
Training and practice using your healthcare facilitys procedure is critical.
Below is one example of donning.
More than one doffing method may be acceptable.
Training and practice using your healthcare facilitys procedure is critical.
Below is one example of doffing.
* Facilities implementing reuse or extended use of PPE will need to adjust their donning and doffing procedures to accommodate those practices.
How to Put On and Take Off PPE – Fact Sheet 8.5 x 11 pdf iconPDF – 1 page
How to Put On and Take Off PPE – Poster 11×17 pdf iconPDF – 1 page
PPE Illustrations  pdf iconPDF – 1 page
Facemask Dos and Donts​ pdf iconPDF – 1 page
Respirator On/Respirator Off pdf iconPDF – 1 page
Guidance for Healthcare Providers about Hand Hygiene and COVID-19
This information complements the Infection Control Guidance and includes additional information about hand hygiene.
Infection Prevention and Control Considerations for Alternate Care Sites
A local surge in the need for medical care might require jurisdictions to establish alternate care sites (ACS) where patients with COVID-19 can remain and receive medical care for the duration of their isolation period.
These are typically established in non-traditional environments, such as converted hotels or mobile field medical units.1  Depending on the jurisdictional needs, ACS could provide three levels of care:
The expected duration of care for patients in ACS would be based on their clinical needs and potentially the timeline for discontinuation of Transmission-Based Precautions.
If ACS will be used to care for both confirmed and suspected COVID-19 patients or for patients without COVID-19 who require care for other reasons, additional infection prevention and control considerations will apply.
For example, planning would need to address physical separation between the cohorts and assigning different HCP with dedicated equipment to each section.
This guidance provides critical infection prevention and control (IPC) considerations for ACS and is intended to supplement existing plans (created by jurisdictions as part of pandemic planning).
It does not address other important aspects of an ACS, such as supplies, accessibility (e.g doors are wide enough for wheelchairs and stretchers) and patient transportation to and from nearby healthcare facilities.
Jurisdictions should consider how close the ACS is to nearby healthcare facilities, including acute care hospitals, and may need to have agreements in place with surrounding healthcare facilities regarding patient transfer.
The ACS Toolkitpdf iconexternal icon is available to provide technical assistance for jurisdictions establishing and operationalizing ACS.
1https://asprtracie.hhs.gov/technical-resources/48/alternate-care-sites-including-shelter-medical-care/47external icon
Infection Prevention and Control Considerations for Alternate Care Sites
A local surge in the need for medical care might require jurisdictions to establish alternate care sites (ACS) where patients with COVID-19 can remain and receive medical care for the duration of their isolation period.
These are typically established in non-traditional environments, such as converted hotels or mobile field medical units.1  Depending on the jurisdictional needs, ACS could provide three levels of care:
The expected duration of care for patients in ACS would be based on their clinical needs and potentially the timeline for discontinuation of Transmission-Based Precautions.
If ACS will be used to care for both confirmed and suspected COVID-19 patients or for patients without COVID-19 who require care for other reasons, additional infection prevention and control considerations will apply.
For example, planning would need to address physical separation between the cohorts and assigning different HCP with dedicated equipment to each section.
This guidance provides critical infection prevention and control (IPC) considerations for ACS and is intended to supplement existing plans (created by jurisdictions as part of pandemic planning).
It does not address other important aspects of an ACS, such as supplies, accessibility (e.g doors are wide enough for wheelchairs and stretchers) and patient transportation to and from nearby healthcare facilities.
Jurisdictions should consider how close the ACS is to nearby healthcare facilities, including acute care hospitals, and may need to have agreements in place with surrounding healthcare facilities regarding patient transfer.
The ACS Toolkitpdf iconexternal icon is available to provide technical assistance for jurisdictions establishing and operationalizing ACS.
1https://asprtracie.hhs.gov/technical-resources/48/alternate-care-sites-including-shelter-medical-care/47external icon
Below are changes to the guidance as of May 29, 2020:
Given their congregate nature and population served, assisted living facilities (ALFs) are at high risk for SARS-CoV-2 spreading among their residents.
If infected with SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, assisted living residents—often older adults with underlying medical conditions—are at increased risk for severe illness.
CDC is aware of confirmed cases of COVID-19 among residents of ALFs in multiple states.
Experience with outbreaks in nursing homes has demonstrated that residents with COVID-19 may not report common symptoms such as fever or respiratory symptoms; some may not report any symptoms.
Unrecognized asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic infections likely contribute to transmission in these settings.
Therefore, CDC recommends source control measures for all persons, including when in a healthcare setting.
Detailed recommendations, including when facemasks versus cloth face coverings should be used are in the CDCs Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Suspected or Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Healthcare Settings
ALFs should refer to guidance from state and local officials when making decisions about relaxing restrictions (e.g easing visitor restrictions, allowing group activities, or restoring communal dining).
CMS has created Nursing Home Reopening Recommendations for State and Local Officialspdf iconexternal icon.
This guidance was created specifically for nursing homes, but content might also be informative for ALFs.
When relaxing any restrictions, ALFs must remain vigilant for COVID-19 among residents and personnel in order to prevent spread and protect residents and personnel from severe infections, hospitalizations, and death.
Depending on the level of care and services provided in the ALF, recommendations in the following guidance documents may also apply:
Identify a point of contact at the local health department to facilitate prompt notification as follows:
Prompt notification of the health department about residents and personnel with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 is critical.
The health department can help ensure all recommended infection prevention and control measures are in place.
Often, when a new-onset infection is identified, there are others in the facility who are also infected but who do not yet have symptoms.
Rapid action to identify, isolate, and test others who might be infected is critical to prevent further spread.
In addition to guidance for health departments addressing case investigation and contact tracing that helps to define who should be considered exposed, CDC has also released SARS-CoV-2 testing guidance for nursing homes, which might be helpful to ALFs.
Educate residents, family members, and personnel about COVID-19: 
Have a plan for visitor and personnel restrictions
Cloth face coverings should not be worn or placed on anyone who has trouble breathing, or anyone who is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Additionally, they should not be placed on children under age 2.
Provide access to supplies and implement recommended infection prevention and control practices:
Rapidly identify and properly respond to residents with suspected or confirmed COVID-19:
Older people with COVID-19 may not show common symptoms such as fever or respiratory symptoms.
Less common symptoms can include new or worsening malaise, headache, or new dizziness, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, loss of taste or smell.
Identification of symptoms consistent with COVID-19 should prompt isolation and further evaluation for COVID-19.
Report COVID-19 cases, facility staffing, and supply information to the National Healthcare Safety Network (NHSN) Long-term Care Facility (LTCF) COVID-19 module weekly
Interim Additional Guidance for Infection Prevention and Control for Patients with Suspected or Confirmed COVID-19 in Nursing Homes
Strategies to Optimize the Supply of PPE and Equipment
Strategies to Mitigate Healthcare Personnel Staffing Shortages
Interim U.S.
Guidance for Risk Assessment and Public Health Management of Healthcare Personnel with Potential Exposure in a Healthcare Setting to Patients with Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19)
Discontinuation of Transmission-Based Precautions and Disposition of Patients with COVID-19 in Healthcare Settings (Interim Guidance)
Criteria for Return to Work for Healthcare Personnel with Confirmed or Suspected COVID-19 (Interim Guidance)
Source Control: Use of a cloth face covering or facemask to cover a persons mouth and nose to prevent spread of respiratory secretions when they are talking, sneezing, or coughing.
Facemasks and cloth face coverings should not be placed on children under age 2, anyone who has trouble breathing, or anyone who is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Cloth face covering: Textile (cloth) covers that are intended to keep the person wearing one from spreading respiratory secretions when talking, sneezing, or coughing.
They are not PPE, and it is uncertain whether cloth face coverings protect the wearer.
Guidance on design, use, and maintenance of cloth face coverings is available.
Facemask: Facemasks are PPE and are often referred to as surgical masks or procedure masks.
Use facemasks according to product labeling and local, state, and federal requirements.
FDA-cleared surgical masks are designed to protect against splashes and sprays and are prioritized for use when such exposures are anticipated, including surgical procedures.
Facemasks that are not regulated by FDA, such as some procedure masks, which are typically used for isolation purposes, may not provide protection against splashes and sprays.
Respirator: A respirator is a personal protective device that is worn on the face, covers at least the nose and mouth, and is used to reduce the wearers risk of inhaling hazardous airborne particles (including dust particles and infectious agents), gases, or vapors.
Respirators are certified by the CDC/NIOSH, including those intended for use in healthcare.
Interim Infection Control Guidance on COVID-19 for Personnel at Blood and Plasma Collection Facilities
This guidance was updated March 21, 2020 and complements the primary Infection Control Guidance.
CDC is working with FDA, state and local health departments, and other HHS agencies to monitor COVID-19 and its potential impact on blood availability and blood safety.
CDC and other HHS agencies are also continuing to work with the AABB Interorganizational Disaster Task Force to enhance preparednesspdf iconexternal icon.
Interim Infection Prevention and Control Guidance for Dental Settings During the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Pandemic
This guidance was updated August 28, 2020 and complements CDCs 
This interim guidance has been updated based on currently available information about coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) and the current situation in the United States.
As dental healthcare facilities begin to restart elective procedures in accordance with guidance from local and state officials, there are precautions that should remain in place as a part of the ongoing response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Most recommendations in this updated guidance are not new (except as noted in the summary of changes above); they have been reorganized into the following sections:
Dental settings should balance the need to provide necessary services while minimizing risk to patients and dental healthcare personnel (DHCP).
CDC has developed a framework for healthcare personnel and healthcare systems for delivery of non-emergent care during the COVID-19 pandemic.
DHCP should regularly consult their state dental boards and state or local health departments for current local information for requirements specific to their jurisdictions, including recognizing the degree of community transmission and impact, and their region-specific recommendations.
Transmission: SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, is thought to spread primarily between people who are in close contact with one another (within 6 feet) through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
Airborne transmission from person-to-person over long distances is unlikely.
However, COVID-19 is a new disease, and we are still learning about how the virus spreads and the severity of illness it causes.
The virus has been shown to persist in aerosols for hours, and on some surfaces for days under laboratory conditions.
SARS-CoV-2 can be spread by people who are not showing symptoms.
Risk: The practice of dentistry involves the use of rotary dental and surgical instruments, such as handpieces or ultrasonic scalers and air-water syringes.
These instruments create a visible spray that can contain particle droplets of water, saliva, blood, microorganisms, and other debris.
Surgical masks protect mucous membranes of the mouth and nose from droplet spatter, but they do not provide complete protection against inhalation of infectious agents.
There are currently no data available to assess the risk of SARS-CoV-2 transmission during dental practice.
CDC recommends using additional infection prevention and control practices during the COVID-19 pandemic, along with standard practices recommended as a part of routine dental healthcare delivery to all patients.
These practices are intended to apply to all patients, not just those with suspected or confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection (See Section 2 for additional practices that should be used when providing dental healthcare for patients with suspected or confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection).
These additional practices for all patients include:
Provide dental treatment only after you have assessed the patient and considered both the risk to the patient of deferring care and the risk to DHCP and patients of healthcare-associated SARS-CoV-2 transmission.
Ensure that you have the appropriate amount of personal protective equipment (PPE) and supplies to support your patients.
If PPE and supplies are limited, prioritize dental care for the highest need, most vulnerable patients first – those at most risk if care is delayed.
DHCP should apply the guidance found in the Framework for Healthcare Systems Providing Non-COVID-19 Clinical Care During the COVID-19 Pandemic to determine how and when to resume non-emergency dental care.
DHCP should stay informed and regularly consult with the state or local health department for region-specific information and recommendations.
Monitor trends in local case counts and deaths, especially for populations at higher risk for severe illness.
Source control refers to use of facemasks (surgical masks or procedure masks) or cloth face coverings to cover a persons mouth and nose to prevent spread of respiratory secretions when they are talking, sneezing, or coughing.
Because of the potential for asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic transmission, source control measures are recommended for everyone in a healthcare facility, even if they do not have signs and symptoms of COVID-19.
Dental healthcare delivery requires close physical contact between patients and DHCP.
However, when possible, physical distancing (maintaining 6 feet between people) is an important strategy to prevent SARS-CoV-2 transmission.
Examples of how physical distancing can be implemented for patients include:
For DHCP, the potential for exposure to SARS-CoV-2 is not limited to direct patient care interactions.
Transmission can also occur through unprotected exposures to asymptomatic or pre-symptomatic co-workers in breakrooms or co-workers or visitors in other common areas.
Examples of how physical distancing can be implemented for DHCP include:
In addition to the use of universal PPE (see below) and source control in healthcare settings, targeted SARS-CoV-2 testing of patients without signs or symptoms of COVID-19 might be used to identify those with asymptomatic or pre-symptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection and further reduce risk for exposures in some healthcare settings.
Depending on guidance from local and state health departments, testing availability, and how rapidly results are available, facilities can consider implementing pre-admission or pre-procedure diagnostic testing with authorized nucleic acid or antigen detection assays for SARS-CoV-2.
Testing results might inform decisions about rescheduling elective procedures or about the need for additional Transmission-Based Precautions when caring for the patient.
Limitations of using this testing strategy include obtaining negative results in patients during their incubation period who later become infectious and false negative test results, depending on the test method used.
For DHCP working in facilities located in areas with no to minimal community transmission
For DHCP working in facilities located in areas with moderate to substantial community transmission
There are multiple sequences recommended for donning and doffing PPE.
One suggested sequence for DHCP is listed below.
Facilities implementing reuse or extended use of PPE will need to adjust their donning and doffing procedures to accommodate those practices (see PPE Optimization Strategies).
Employers should select appropriate PPE and provide it to DHCP in accordance with OSHAs PPE standards (29 CFR 1910 Subpart I)external icon.
DHCP must receive training on and demonstrate an understanding of:
Dental facilities must ensure that any reusable PPE is properly cleaned, decontaminated, and maintained after and between uses.
Dental settings also should have policies and procedures describing a recommended sequence for safely donning and doffing PPE.
Major distributors in the United States have reported shortages of PPE, especially surgical masks and respirators.
The anticipated timeline for return to routine levels of PPE is not yet known.
CDC has developed a series of strategies or options to optimize supplies of PPE in healthcare settings when there is limited supply, and a burn rate calculator that provides information for healthcare facilities to plan and optimize the use of PPE for response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Optimization strategies are provided for gloves, gowns, facemasks, eye protection, and respirators.
These policies are only intended to remain in effect during times of shortages during the COVID-19 pandemic.
DHCP should review this guidance carefully, as it is based on a set of tiered recommendations.
Strategies should be implemented sequentially.
Decisions by facilities to move to contingency and crisis capacity strategies are based on the following assumptions:
For example, extended use of facemasks and respirators should only be undertaken when the facility is at contingency or crisis capacity and has reasonably implemented all applicable administrative and engineering controls.
Such controls include selectively canceling elective and non-urgent procedures and appointments for which PPE is typically used by DHCP.
Extended use of PPE is not intended to encourage dental facilities to practice at a normal patient volume during a PPE shortage, but only to be implemented in the short term when other controls have been exhausted.
Once the supply of PPE has increased, facilities should return to conventional strategies.
Respirators that comply with international standards may be considered during times of known shortages.
CDC has guidance entitled Factors to Consider When Planning to Purchase Respirators from Another Country which includes a webinar, and Assessments of International Respirators.
Ensure DHCP practice strict adherence to hand hygiene, including:
CDC does not provide guidance on the decontamination of building heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) systems potentially exposed to SARS-CoV-2.
To date, CDC has not identified confirmatory evidence to demonstrate that viable virus is contaminating these systems.
CDC provides the following recommendations for proper maintenance of ventilation systems and patient placement and volume strategies in dental settings.
Surgical procedures that might pose higher risk for SARS-CoV-2 transmission if the patient has COVID-19 include those that generate potentially infectious aerosols or involve anatomic regions where viral loads might be higher, such as the nose and throat, oropharynx, respiratory tract (see Surgical FAQ).
Aerosol generating procedures – Procedures that may generate aerosols (i.e particles of respirable size, &lt;10 μm).
Aerosols can remain airborne for extended periods and can be inhaled.
Development of a comprehensive list of aerosol generating procedures for dental healthcare settings has not been possible, due to limitations in available data on which procedures may generate potentially infectious aerosols and the challenges in determining their potential for infectivity.
There is neither expert consensus, nor sufficient supporting data, to create a definitive and comprehensive list of aerosol generating procedures for dental healthcare settings.
Commonly used dental equipment known to create aerosols and airborne contamination include ultrasonic scaler, high-speed dental handpiece, air/water syringe, air polishing, and air abrasion.
Airborne infection isolation rooms – Single-patient rooms at negative pressure relative to the surrounding areas, and with a minimum of 6 air changes per hour (12 air changes per hour are recommended for new construction or renovation).
Air from these rooms should be exhausted directly to the outside or be filtered through a high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter directly before recirculation.
Room doors should be kept closed except when entering or leaving the room, and entry and exit should be minimized.
Facilities should monitor and document the proper negative-pressure function of these rooms.
Air changes per hour: the ratio of the volume of air flowing through a space in a certain period of time (the airflow rate) to the volume of that space (the room volume).
This ratio is expressed as the number of air changes per hour.
Cloth face covering: Textile (cloth) covers that are intended for source control.
They are not personal protective equipment (PPE) and it is uncertain whether cloth face coverings protect the wearer.
Dental healthcare personnel (DHCP) – Refers to all paid and unpaid persons serving in dental healthcare settings who have the potential for direct or indirect exposure to patients or infectious materials, including:
Facemaskpdf icon: Facemasks are PPE and are often referred to as surgical masks or procedure masks.
Use facemasks according to product labeling and local, state, and federal requirements.
FDA-cleared surgical masks are preferred in dental settings because they are designed to protect against splashes and sprays and are prioritized for use when such exposures are anticipated, including surgical procedures.
Facemasks that are not regulated by FDA, such as some procedure masks, which are typically used for isolation purposes, may not provide protection against splashes and sprays.
Respirator: Is a personal protective device that is worn on the face, covers at least the nose and mouth, and is used to reduce the wearers risk of inhaling hazardous airborne particles (including dust particles and infectious agents), gases, or vapors.
Respirators are certified by CDC/National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), including those intended for use in healthcare.
Respirator use must be in the context of a complete respiratory protection program in accordance with OSHA Respiratory Protection standard (29 CFR 1910.134external icon).
DHCP should be medically cleared and fit tested if using respirators with tight-fitting facepieces (e.g a NIOSH-approved N95 respirator) and trained in the proper use of respirators, safe removal and disposal, and medical contraindications to respirator use.
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Outpatient Dialysis Facility Preparedness Assessment Toolpdf icon
Below are changes to the guidance as of August 24, 2020:
This information is provided to clarify SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), infection prevention and control (IPC) recommendations that are specific to outpatient hemodialysis facilities.
This information complements, but does not replace, the general CDC IPC recommendations for SARS-CoV-2 available in Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Healthcare Personnel During the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Pandemic.
This guidance is based on the currently available information about SARS-CoV-2.
This approach will be refined and updated as more information becomes available and as response needs change in the United States.
It is important to stay informed about SARS-CoV-2 to prevent introduction and minimize spread in your dialysis facility.
Consult with public health authorities to understand if transmission of SARS-CoV-2 is occurring in your community.
As part of routine infection control, outpatient dialysis facilities should have established policies and practices to reduce the spread of contagious respiratory and other pathogens.
Current procedures for routine cleaning and disinfection of dialysis stations are appropriate for patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection; however, it is important to validate that the product used for surface disinfection is active against SARS-CoV-2external icon.
Facilities should ensure they are following the manufacturers label instructions for proper use and dilution of the disinfectant.
The manufacturers instructions are specific to the product and should be followed (e.g this might not necessarily conform to a 1:100 or 1:10 dilution); some products do not require preparation or dilution and are sold as ready to use.
The product you are currently using may need to be used at a different concentration or a different contact time.
Staff should be educated, trained, and have competency assessed for all cleaning and disinfection procedures in the facility.
Ensure staff use appropriate PPE according to manufacturers recommendations when cleaning.
Ensure that routine cleaning and disinfection procedures are followed consistently and correctly for patients with suspected or confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection or who report close contact to someone with SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Facilities should have a process to respond to patients or HCP with newly identified SARS-CoV-2 infection, including assessing risk to others in the facility who may have had close contact with infected individuals.
Given their congregate nature and resident population served (e.g older adults often with underlying chronic medical conditions), nursing home populations are at high risk of being affected by respiratory pathogens like COVID-19 and other pathogens, including multidrug-resistant organisms (e.g Carbapenemase-producing organisms, Candida auris ).
As demonstrated by the COVID-19 pandemic, a strong infection prevention and control (IPC) program is critical to protect both residents and healthcare personnel (HCP).
Facilities should assign at least one individual with training in IPC to provide on-site management of their COVID-19 prevention and response activities because of the breadth of activities for which an IPC program is responsible, including developing IPC policies and procedures, performing infection surveillance, providing competency-based training of HCP, and auditing adherence to recommended IPC practices.
The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) recently issued Nursing Home Reopening Guidance for State and Local Officialspdf iconexternal icon that outlines criteria that could be used to determine when nursing homes could relax restrictions on visitation and group activities and when such restrictions should be reimplemented.
Nursing homes should consider the current situation in their facility and community and refer to that guidance as well as direction from state and local officials when making decisions about relaxing restrictions.
When relaxing any restrictions, nursing homes must remain vigilant for COVID-19 among residents and HCP in order to prevent spread and protect residents and HCP from severe infections, hospitalizations, and death.
This guidance has been updated and reorganized according to core IPC practices that should remain in place even as nursing homes resume normal practices, plus additional strategies  depending on the stages described in the CMS Reopening Guidancepdf iconexternal icon or at the direction of state and local officials.
This guidance is based on currently available information about COVID-19 and will be refined and updated as more information becomes available.
These recommendations supplement the CDCs Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Suspected or Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)  in Healthcare Settings and are specific for nursing homes, including skilled nursing facilities.
These practices should remain in place even as nursing homes resume normal activities.
Assign One or More Individuals with Training in Infection Control to Provide On-Site Management of the IPC Program.
Report COVID-19 cases, facility staffing, and supply information to the National Healthcare Safety Network (NHSN) Long-term Care Facility  (LTCF) COVID-19 Module weekly.
Educate Residents, Healthcare Personnel, and Visitors about COVID-19, Current Precautions Being Taken in the Facility, and Actions They Should Take to Protect Themselves.
Have a Plan for Visitor Restrictions.
Create a Plan for Testing Residents and Healthcare Personnel for SARS-CoV-2.
Evaluate and Manage Healthcare Personnel.
Provide Supplies Necessary to Adhere to Recommended Infection Prevention and Control Practices.
Identify Space in the Facility that Could be Dedicated to Monitor and Care for Residents with COVID-19.
Create a Plan for Managing New Admissions and Readmissions Whose COVID-19 Status is Unknown.
Evaluate and Manage Residents with Symptoms of COVID-19.
These strategies will depend on the stages described in the CMS Reopening Guidance or the direction of state and local officials.
Guidance for Pharmacists and Pharmacy Technicians in Community Pharmacies during the COVID-19 Response
Below are changes to the guidance as of May 28, 2020:
This guidance applies to all pharmacy staff to minimize their risk of exposure to SARS-CoV-2 and reduce the risk for patients during the COVID-19 pandemic.
As a vital part of the healthcare system, pharmacies play an important role in providing medicines, therapeutics, vaccines, and critical health services to the public.
Ensuring continuous function of pharmacies during the COVID-19 pandemic is important.
During the pandemic, pharmacy staff can minimize their risk of exposure to the virus that causes COVID-19 and reduce the risk for patients by using the principles of infection prevention and control and social distancing.
Make sure that pharmacy staff who have fever or symptoms that may be due to COVID-19 stay home and away from the workplace until they have recovered.
Ensure that sick leave policies are flexible, nonpunitive, and consistent with public health guidance and that employees are aware of and understand these policies.
Although the actual process of preparing medications for dispensing is not a direct patient care activity, the other components of medication dispensing such as prescription intake, patient counseling, or patient education should be conducted in ways that maintain social distancing and minimize the risk of exposure for pharmacy staff and patients.
In addition to following workplace guidance, pharmacy staff should:
Pharmacies that are participating in public health testing for COVID-19 should communicate with local and state public health staff to determine how to operationalize and prioritize client testing.
State and local health departments will inform pharmacies about procedures to collect, store, and ship specimens appropriately, including during afterhours or on weekends/holidays.
Some pharmacies are including self-collection options.
In the CDC Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Suspected or Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Healthcare Settings, there is guidance for collecting respiratory specimens.
Pharmacy staff conducting COVID-19 testing and other close-contact patient care procedures that will likely elicit coughs or sneezes (e.g influenza and strep testing) should be provided with appropriate PPE.
Staff who use respirators must be familiar with proper use and follow a complete respiratory protection program that complies with OSHA Respiratory Protection standard (29 CFR 1910.134).
Staff should receive training on the appropriate donning and doffing of PPE.
Cloth face coverings should NOT be worn by staff instead of a respirator or facemask if more than source control is required.
Evaluate provision of routine clinical preventive services, including adult vaccinations, that require face-to-face encounters.
Based on local conditions, evaluate the risk of an in-person encounter versus the benefit using the Framework for Healthcare Systems Providing Non-COVID-19 Clinical Care During the COVID-19 Pandemic.
These changes were made June 15, 2020.
CDC guidance for SARS-CoV-2 infection may be adapted by state and local health departments to respond to rapidly changing local circumstances.
Medical examiners, coroners, and pathologists should immediately notify their localexternal icon or stateexternal icon health department in the event of the identification of a deceased person with known or suspected COVID-19.
State and local health departments can contact CDCs Emergency Operations Center (EOC) at 770-488-7100 for urgent consultation if an autopsy is being considered for a deceased person with known or suspected COVID-19 or if submission of autopsy tissue specimens or postmortem swabs to CDC for COVID-19 testing is desired.
The EOC will assist local/state health departments to collect, store, and ship specimens appropriately to CDC, including during afterhours or on weekends/holidays.
This interim guidance is based on what is currently known about coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Current knowledge supports that spread of SARS-CoV-2 (the virus that causes COVID-19) usually happens when a person is in close contact (i.e within about 6 feet) via respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
This route of transmission is not a concern when handling human remains or performing postmortem procedures.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
This is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads, but we are still learning more about how this virus spreads.
CDC will update this interim guidance as additional information becomes available.
This document provides specific guidance for the collection and submission of postmortem specimens from deceased known or suspected COVID-19 cases.
This document also provides recommendations for biosafety and infection control practices during specimen collection and handling, including during autopsy procedures.
The guidance can be used by medical examiners, coroners, pathologists, other workers involved in providing postmortem care, and local and state health departments.
Postmortem activities should be conducted with a focus on avoiding aerosol generating procedures and ensuring that if aerosol generation is likely (e.g when using an oscillating saw) that appropriate engineering controls and personal protective equipment (PPE) are used.
These precautions and the use of Standard Precautions are  appropriate work practices to help prevent direct contact with infectious material, percutaneous injury, and other hazards related to moving human remains and handling embalming chemicals.
Medical examiners, coroners, and other healthcare professionals should use professional judgment to determine if a decedent had signs and symptoms compatible with COVID-19 during life and whether postmortem testing is necessary.
Many patients with confirmed COVID-19 have developed fever and/or symptoms of acute respiratory illness (e.g fever, cough, difficulty breathing).
There are epidemiologic factors that may also help guide decisions about COVID-19 testing, such as documented COVID-19 infections in a jurisdiction, known community transmission, contact with a known COVID-19 patient, or being a part of a cluster of respiratory illness in a closed setting (e.g a long-term care facility).
Testing for other causes of respiratory illness (e.g influenza) is strongly encouraged.
Recommendations about the type of postmortem specimens to collect vary based on whether the case of COVID-19 is suspected or confirmed, as well as whether an autopsy is performed.
The following factors should be considered when determining if an autopsy will be performed for a deceased known or suspected COVID-19 case:
If an autopsy is performed for a suspected COVID-19 case, collection of the following postmortem specimens is recommended:
If an autopsy is NOT performed for a suspected COVID-19 case, collection of the following postmortem specimens is recommended:
If an autopsy is performed for a confirmed COVID-19 case, collection of the following postmortem specimens should be considered:
In addition to postmortem specimens, any remaining specimens (e.g NP swab, sputum, serum, stool) that may have been collected prior to death should be retained.
Please refer to Interim Guidelines for Collecting, Handling, and Testing Clinical Specimens from Persons for Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) for more information.
Instructions in this section apply if only postmortem NP swabs are being collected from a deceased person with known or suspected COVID-19.
If an autopsy is being performed or aerosol generating procedures (AGPs) are being conducted, instructions in the section Autopsy Procedures should be followed.
If only a postmortem NP swab is being collected, individuals in the room during specimen collection should be limited to healthcare personnel (HCP) obtaining the specimen.
HCP should follow Standard Precautions.
Since collection of nasopharyngeal swab specimens from deceased persons will not induce coughing or sneezing, a negative pressure room is not required if only a NP swab is being collected from the decedent.
Personnel should adhere to Standard Precautions as described above.
Since collection of nasopharyngeal swab specimens from deceased persons will not induce coughing or sneezing, NIOSH-approved disposable N-95 respirator or higher is not required if only a NP swab is being collected from the decedent.
The following PPE should be worn at a minimum:
Standard Precautions, Contact Precautions, and Airborne Precautions with eye protection (goggles or a face shield) should be followed during autopsy.
Many of the following procedures are consistent with existing guidelines for safe work practices in the autopsy setting; see Guidelines for Safe Work Practices in Human and Animal Medical Diagnostic Laboratories.
Autopsies on decedents known or suspected to be COVID-19 cases should be conducted in Airborne Infection Isolation Rooms (AIIRs).
These rooms:
Doors to the room should be kept closed except during entry and egress.
If an AIIR is not available, ensure the room is negative pressure with no air recirculation to adjacent spaces.
A portable HEPA recirculation unit could also be placed in the room to provide further air filtration .
Local airflow control (i.e laminar flow systems) can be used to direct aerosols away from personnel.
If use of an AIIR or HEPA unit is not possible, the procedure should be performed in the most protective environment possible.
AIIR room air should never be recirculated in the building, but directly exhausted outdoors, away from windows, doors, areas of human traffic or gathering spaces, and from other building air intake systems.
The following PPE should be worn during autopsy procedures:
Surgical scrubs, shoe covers, and surgical cap should be used per routine protocols.
Doff (take off) PPEpdf icon carefully to avoid contaminating yourself and before leaving the autopsy suite or adjacent anteroom.
After removing PPE, discard the PPE in the appropriate laundry or waste receptacle.
Reusable PPE (e.g goggles, face shields, and PAPRs) must be cleaned and disinfected according to the manufacturers recommendations before reuse.
Immediately after doffing PPE, wash hands with soap and water for 20 seconds.
If hands are not visibly dirty and soap and water are not available, an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains 60%-95% alcohol may be used.
However, if hands are visibly dirty, always wash hands with soap and water before using alcohol-based hand sanitizer.
Avoid touching the face with gloved or unwashed hands.
Ensure that hand hygiene facilities are readily available at the point of use (e.g at or adjacent to the PPE doffing area).
If the PPE supply is low, see Strategies for Optimizing the Supply of PPE.
Additional safety and health guidance is available for workers handling deceased known or suspected COVID-19 cases at the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), COVID-19 websiteexternal icon.
Implementing proper biosafety and infection control practices is critical when collecting specimens.
Please refer to Interim Laboratory Biosafety Guidelines for Handling and Processing Specimens Associated with Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) for additional information.
For suspected COVID-19 cases, CDC recommends collecting and testing postmortem nasopharyngeal swabs (NP swabs) and if an autopsy is performed, lower respiratory specimens (lung swabs).
If the diagnosis of COVID-19 was established before death, collection of these specimens for COVID-19 testing may not be necessary.
Medical examiners, coroners, and pathologists should work with their local or state health department to determine capacity for testing postmortem swab specimens.
NP specimen is the preferred choice for upper respiratory tract swab-based SARS-CoV-2 testing.
When collection of a postmortem NP swab is not possible, each of the following is an acceptable alternative:
Use only synthetic fiber swabs with plastic shafts.
Do not use calcium alginate swabs or swabs with wooden shafts, as they may contain substances that inactivate some viruses and inhibit PCR testing.
Place swabs immediately into sterile tubes containing 2-3 ml of viral transport media.
Nasal swabs (NS) or nasal mid-turbinate (NMT) swabs should be placed in a transport tube containing either viral transport medium, Amies transport medium, or sterile saline.
If both NP and OP swabs are collected, they should be combined in a single tube to maximize test sensitivity and limit use of testing resources.
No data are currently available on the frequency of detection of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the virus that causes COVID-19, by RT-PCR on postmortem swabs collected at different durations after death.
If COVID-19 testing on postmortem swab specimens is being considered for a suspected COVID-19 case, SARS-CoV-2 RNA may still be detected up to 3 days postmortem and possibly longer based on available data from experiences with MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV; however sensitivity may be reduced with a longer postmortem interval, and duration of illness may need to be considered in interpreting a negative result.
Store specimens at 2-8°C for up to 72 hours after collection.
If a delay in testing or shipping is expected, store specimens at -70°C or below.
Separate postmortem specimens (e.g NP or lung swabs) should be collected for routine testing of respiratory pathogens at either clinical or public health labs.
Note that clinical laboratories should NOT attempt viral isolation from specimens collected from known or suspected COVID-19 cases.
Other postmortem specimen collection and evaluations should be directed by the decedents clinical and exposure history, scene investigation, and gross autopsy findings, and may include routine bacterial cultures, toxicology, and other studies as indicated.
Formalin-fixed, and formalin-fixed-paraffin-embedded tissue specimens, obtained at autopsy, can be used to establish a postmortem diagnosis of COVID-19 infection by using immunohistochemical and molecular techniques available at the CDCs Infectious Diseases Pathology Branch (IDPB).
An important advantage of this approach is that it allows the preservation and retention of relatively stable specimens that can be tested at a later date to provide a confirmatory diagnosis.
The collection of fixed tissues can be particularly important when conventional swab-based testing methods are not available or have provided inconclusive results.
Viral antigens and nucleic acids may be focally distributed in respiratory tissues of patients with COVID-19 disease and the distribution and quantity of virus can vary among individual patients.
For these reasons, we recommend collecting:
To minimize potential viral contamination of non-involved tissues, lung and airway specimens should be collected immediately following removal of the chest plate.
Then place specimens into a separate sterile specimen cup containing 10% neutral buffered formalin.
Focused sampling of these tissues, collected by autopsies limited to the chest, or by directed collection accomplished by incision, can be used when deemed appropriate.
If involvement of one or more other organs (e.g heart, kidneys) is suggested by clinical history or laboratory findings obtained prior to death, representative samples of these tissues should be considered for sampling and submission.
Complete autopsies could be warranted in certain circumstances, as determined by the medical examiner, coroner, or community pathologist.
Collection of tissue samples approximately 5 mm in thickness (i.e sample would fit in a tissue cassette) is recommended for optimal fixation.
Tissues should be placed in 10% buffered formalin, in a volume that is approximately 10 times greater than the volume of tissue.
Optimal fixation is three days (72 hours).
Specimens should be shipped to CDC as soon as possible following complete fixation.
Prolonged immersion in formalin (e.g &gt; 2 weeks) can diminish the sensitivity of virus detection assays.
Alternately, formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded tissues (original blocks obtained at autopsy) can be submitted for evaluation.
Serologic tests for SARS-CoV-2 look for the presence of antibodies.
It typically takes about one to two weeks after illness onset with COVID-19 for antibodies to develop; some people may take longer.
Depending on when someone was infected and the timing of the test, the test may not find antibodies in someone with a current COVID-19 infection.
Per FDA guidance, antibody tests have not been validated for diagnosis of COVID-19 infection, and antibody tests by themselves are of limited value in the immediate diagnosis of a patient where COVID-19 infection is suspected.
For more information, see: Interim Guidelines for COVID-19 Antibody Testing
After collecting and properly securing and labeling specimens in primary containers with the appropriate media/solution, they must be transferred from the autopsy suite in a safe manner to laboratory staff who can process them for shipping.
Medical examiners, coroners, and other healthcare professionals should work with their state and local health departments to coordinate testing through public health laboratories.
In addition, COVID-19 testing, authorized by the Food and Drug Administration under an Emergency Use Authorization (EUA), is available in clinical laboratories.
Postmortem swab specimens may be shipped to CDC if testing is not available at public health or clinical laboratories in a jurisdiction, or if repeated testing results remain inconclusive or if other unusual results are obtained.
State or local health departments should contact CDC at respvirus@cdc.gov prior to submitting samples.
If shipping samples to CDC:  If specimens will ship without delay, store specimens at 2-8°C, and ship overnight to CDC on ice pack.
If a delay in shipping will result in receipt at CDC more than 72 hours after collection, store specimens at -70°C or below and ship overnight to CDC on dry ice.
Additional useful and detailed information on packing, shipping, and transporting specimens can be found at Interim Laboratory Biosafety Guidelines for Handling and Processing Specimens Associated with Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Specimens must be packaged, shipped, and transported according to the current edition of the International Air Transport Association (IATA) Dangerous Goods Regulations external iconexternal icon.
Label each specimen container with the patients ID number (e.g medical record number), unique CDC or state-generated NCOV specimen ID (e.g laboratory requisition number), specimen type (e.g NP swab) and the date the sample was collected.
Complete a CDC Form 50.34 for each specimen submitted.
In the upper left box of the form, 1) for test requested select Respiratory virus molecular detection (non-influenza) CDC-10401 and 2) for At CDC, bring to the attention of enter Stephen Lindstrom: 2019-nCoV PUI-Autopsy.
Please refer to our instruction guidance for submitting CDC Form 50.34 found here: Guidelines For Submitting Specimens to CDC.pdf icon
For additional information, consultation, or the CDC shipping address, contact the CDC Emergency Operations Center (EOC) at 770-488-7100.
At this time, CDCs Infectious Diseases Pathology Branch is accepting formalin-fixed (wet) tissues and formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded autopsy tissue blocks for COVID-19 testing from decedents when the following three criteria are met:
For cases meeting the above criteria, follow the steps outlined below to obtain pre-approval from CDCs Infectious Diseases Pathology Branch to submit specimens for evaluation:
The following are general guidelines for cleaning and waste disposal following an autopsy of a decedent with confirmed or suspected COVID-19.
Current evidence suggests that novel coronavirus may remain viable for hours to days on surfaces made from a variety of materials.
Use routine cleaning and disinfection procedures (e.g using cleaners and water to pre-clean surfaces) prior to applying Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)-approved disinfectantsexternal iconexternal icon that meet the criteria for use against SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.
After an autopsy of a decedent with confirmed or suspected COVID-19, the following recommendations apply for the autopsy room (and anteroom if applicable):
If it is necessary to transfer a body to a bag, follow Standard Precautions, including additional personal protective equipment (PPE) if splashing of fluids is expected.
Standard body bagging procedures should be followed, consistent with procedures used for deaths where COVID-19 is not suspected.
Given the varying weights of decedents and variety, construction, and conditions of body bag materials, postmortem care workers should use prudent judgement determining if risks for puncture, tearing, or failure of body bags could occur and whether a second body bag or a body bag of thicker, stronger material (e.g.
minimum of 6 mil thickness) is necessary.
Risk factors include but are not limited to:
Follow standard routine procedures when transporting the body after specimens have been collected and the body has been bagged.
Disinfect the outside of the bag with Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)-approved disinfectantsexternal icon that meet the criteria for use against SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, applied according to the manufacturers recommendations.
Wear disposable nitrile gloves when handling the body bag.
The Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) Burn Rate Calculator is now available as an app.
Facilities can use the NIOSH PPE Tracker app to calculate their average PPE consumption rate or burn rate.
The app estimates how many days a PPE supply will last given current inventory levels and PPE burn rate.
The app is available for both iOSexternal icon and Androidexternal icon devices.
Visit the NIOSH PPE Tracker app page to download this free tool.
Use this Excel spreadsheet to calculate your PPE burn rate
The Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) Burn Rate Calculator excel icon3 sheets is a spreadsheet-based model that will help healthcare facilities plan and optimize the use of PPE for response to coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Non-healthcare facilities such as correctional facilities may also find this tool useful.
To use the calculator, enter the number of full boxes of each type of PPE in stock (gowns, gloves, surgical masks, respirators, and face shields, for example) and the total number of patients at your facility.
The tool will calculate the average consumption rate, also referred to as a burn rate, for each type of PPE entered in the spreadsheet.
This information can then be used to estimate how long the remaining supply of PPE will last, based on the average consumption rate.
Using the calculator can help facilities make order projections for future needs.
* MS Windows and Office is a copyrighted product produced by Microsoft Corporation, based in Redmond, WA.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Before loading and starting the PPE Burn Rate Calculator, you may need to change Excels security level.
To do so:
We recommend downloading and saving the PPE Burn Rate Calculator spreadsheet to your computer before opening the spreadsheet.
Taking this step will open the spreadsheet in Excel rather than your web browser.
Audience: These considerations are intended for use by federal, state, and local public health officials; leaders in occupational health services and infection prevention and control programs; and other leaders in healthcare settings who are responsible for developing and implementing policies and procedures for preventing pathogen transmission in healthcare settings.
Purpose: This document offers a series of strategies or options to optimize supplies of eye protection in healthcare settings when there is limited supply.
It does not address other aspects of pandemic planning; for those, healthcare facilities can refer to COVID-19 preparedness plans.
Surge capacity refers to the ability to manage a sudden increase in patient volume that would severely challenge or exceed the present capacity of a facility.
While there are no widely accepted measurements or triggers to distinguish surge capacity from daily patient care capacity, surge capacity is a useful framework to approach a decreased supply of eye protection during the COVID-19 response.
To help healthcare facilities plan and optimize the use of eye protection in response to COVID-19, CDC has developed a Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) Burn Rate Calculator.
Three general strata have been used to describe surge capacity and can be used to prioritize measures to conserve glove supplies along the continuum of care.
CDCs optimization strategies for eye protection supply offer a continuum of options for use when eye protection supplies are stressed, running low, or exhausted.
Contingency and then crisis capacity measures augment conventional capacity measures and are meant to be considered and implemented sequentially.
As eye protection availability returns to normal, healthcare facilities should promptly resume standard practices.
Decisions to implement contingency and crisis strategies are based upon these assumptions:
Use eye protection according to product labeling and local, state, and federal requirements.
Decrease length of stay for medically stable patients with COVID-19.
Selectively cancel elective and non-urgent procedures and appointments for which eye protection is typically used by HCP.
Shift eye protection supplies from disposable to re-usable devices (i.e goggles and reusable face shields).
Implement extended use of eye protection.
Extended use of eye protection is the practice of wearing the same eye protection for repeated close contact encounters with several different patients, without removing eye protection between patient encounters.
Extended use of eye protection can be applied to disposable and reusable devices.
Cancel all elective and non-urgent procedures and appointments for which eye protection is typically used by HCP.
Use eye protection devices beyond the manufacturer-designated shelf life during patient care activities.
If there is no date available on the eye protection device label or packaging, facilities should contact the manufacturer.
The user should visually inspect the product prior to use and, if there are concerns (such as degraded materials), discard the product.
Prioritize eye protection for selected activities such as:
Consider using safety glasses (e.g trauma glasses) that have extensions to cover the side of the eyes.
However, protective eyewear (e.g safety glasses, trauma glasses) with gaps between glasses and the face likely do not protect eyes from all splashes and sprays.
Exclude HCP at increased risk for severe illness from COVID-19 from contact with known or suspected COVID-19 patients.
Designate convalescent HCP for provision of care to known or suspected COVID-19 patients.
Adhere to recommended manufacturer instructions for cleaning and disinfection.
When manufacturer instructions for cleaning and disinfection are unavailable, such as for single use disposable face shields, consider:
Audience: These considerations are intended for use by federal, state, and local public health officials; leaders in occupational health services and infection prevention and control programs; and other leaders in healthcare settings who are responsible for developing and implementing policies and procedures for preventing pathogen transmission in healthcare settings.
Purpose: This document offers a series of strategies or options to optimize supplies of isolation gowns in healthcare settings when there is limited supply.
It does not address other aspects of pandemic planning; for those, healthcare facilities can refer to COVID-19 preparedness plans.
Surge capacity refers to the ability to manage a sudden increase in patient volume that would severely challenge or exceed the present capacity of a facility.
While there are no widely accepted measurements or triggers to distinguish surge capacity from daily patient care capacity, surge capacity is a useful framework to approach a decreased supply of isolation gowns during the COVID-19 response.
To help healthcare facilities plan and optimize the use of gowns in response to COVID-19, CDC has developed a Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) Burn Rate Calculator.
Three general strata have been used to describe surge capacity and can be used to prioritize measures to conserve isolation gown supplies along the continuum of care.
CDCs optimization strategies for gown supply offer a continuum of options for use when gown supplies are stressed, running low, or exhausted.
Contingency and then crisis capacity measures augment conventional capacity measures and are meant to be considered and implemented sequentially.
As gown availability returns to normal, healthcare facilities should promptly resume standard practices.
Decisions to implement contingency and crisis strategies are based upon these assumptions:
Use isolation gown alternatives that offer equivalent or higher protection.
Several fluid-resistant and impermeable protective clothing options are available in the marketplace for HCP.
These include isolation gowns and surgical gowns.
When selecting the most appropriate protective clothing, employers should consider all of the available information on recommended protective clothing, including the potential limitations.
Nonsterile, disposable patient isolation gowns, which are used for routine patient care in healthcare settings, are appropriate for use by HCP when caring for patients with suspected or confirmed COVID-19.
In times of gown shortages, surgical gowns should be prioritized for surgical and other sterile procedures.
Current U.S. guidelines do not require use of gowns that conform to any standards.
Decrease length of stay for medically stable patients with COVID-19.
Selectively cancel elective and non-urgent procedures and appointments for which a gown is typically used by HCP.
Shift gown use towards cloth isolation gowns.
Reusable (i.e washable) gowns are typically made of polyester or polyester-cotton fabrics.
Gowns made of these fabrics can be safely laundered according to routine procedures and reused.
Care should be taken to ensure that HCP do not touch outer surfaces of the gown during care.
Consider the use of coveralls.
Coveralls typically provide 360-degree protection because they are designed to cover the whole body, including the back and lower legs, and sometimes the head and feet as well.
While the material and seam barrier properties are essential for defining the protective level, the coverage provided by the material used in the garment design, as well as certain features including closures, will greatly affect the protective level.
HCP unfamiliar with the use of coveralls must be trained and practiced in their use, prior to using during patient care.
In the United States, the NFPA 1999 standardexternal icon specifies the minimum design, performance, testing, documentation, and certification requirements for new single-use and new multiple-use emergency medical operations protective clothing, including coveralls for HCP.
Use of gowns beyond the manufacturer-designated shelf life for training.
The majority of isolation gowns do not have a manufacturer-designated shelf life.
However, consideration can be made to using gowns that do and are past their manufacturer-designated shelf life.
If there is no date available on the gown label or packaging, facilities should contact the manufacturer.
Use gowns or coveralls conforming to international standards.
Current guidelines do not require use of gowns that conform to any standards.
In times of shortages, healthcare facilities can consider using international gowns and coveralls.
Gowns and coveralls that conform to international standards, including with EN 13795 and EN14126, could be reserved for activities that may involve moderate to high amounts of body fluids.
Cancel all elective and non-urgent procedures and appointments for which a gown is typically used by HCP.
Extended use of isolation gowns.
Consideration can be made to extend the use of isolation gowns (disposable or cloth) such that the same gown is worn by the same HCP when interacting with more than one patient known to be infected with the same infectious disease when these patients housed in the same location (i.e COVID-19 patients residing in an isolation cohort).
This can be considered only if there are no additional co-infectious diagnoses transmitted by contact (such as Clostridioides difficile) among patients.
If the gown becomes visibly soiled, it must be removed and discarded as per usual practicespdf icon.
Re-use of cloth isolation gowns.
Disposable gowns are not typically amenable to being doffed and re-used because the ties and fasteners typically break during doffing.
Cloth isolation gowns could potentially be untied and retied and could be considered for re-use without laundering in between.
In a situation where the gown is being used as part of standard precautions to protect HCP from a splash, the risk of re-using a non-visibly soiled cloth isolation gown may be lower.
However, for care of patients with suspected or confirmed COVID-19, HCP risk from re-use of cloth isolation gowns without laundering among (1) single HCP caring for multiple patients using one gown or (2) among multiple HCP sharing one gown is unclear.
The goal of this strategy is to minimize exposures to HCP and not necessarily prevent transmission between patients.
Any gown that becomes visibly soiled during patient care should be disposed of and cleaned.
Prioritize gowns.
Gowns should be prioritized for the following activities:
Surgical gowns should be prioritized for surgical and other sterile procedures.
Facilities may consider suspending use of gowns for endemic multidrug resistant organisms (e.g MRSA, VRE, ESBL-producing organisms).
Consider using gown alternatives that have not been evaluated as effective.
In situation of severely limited or no available isolation gowns, the following pieces of clothing can be considered as a last resort for care of COVID-19 patients as single use.
However, none of these options can be considered PPE, since their capability to protect HCP is unknown.
Preferable features include long sleeves and closures (snaps, buttons) that can be fastened and secured.
Reusable patient gowns and lab coats can be safely laundered according to routine procedures.
Audience: These considerations are intended for use by federal, state, and local public health officials; leaders in occupational health services and infection prevention and control programs; and other leaders in healthcare settings who are responsible for developing and implementing policies and procedures for preventing pathogen transmission in healthcare settings.
Purpose: This document offers a series of strategies or options to optimize supplies of facemasks in healthcare settings when there is limited supply.
It does not address other aspects of pandemic planning; for those, healthcare facilities can refer to COVID-19 preparedness plans.
Surge capacity refers to the ability to manage a sudden increase in patient volume that would severely challenge or exceed the present capacity of a facility.
While there are no commonly accepted measurements or triggers to distinguish surge capacity from daily patient care capacity, surge capacity is a useful framework to approach a decreased supply of facemasks during the COVID-19 response.
To help healthcare facilities plan and optimize the use of facemasks in response to COVID-19, CDC has developed a Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) Burn Rate Calculator.
Three general strata have been used to describe surge capacity and can be used to prioritize measures to conserve facemask supplies along the continuum of care.
CDCs optimization strategies for facemask supply offer a continuum of options for use when facemask supplies are stressed, running low, or exhausted.
Contingency and then crisis capacity measures augment conventional capacity measures and are meant to be considered and implemented sequentially.
As facemask availability returns to normal, healthcare facilities should promptly resume standard practices.
Decisions to implement contingency and crisis strategies are based upon these assumptions:
Use facemasks according to product labeling and local, state, and federal requirements.
Decrease length of stay for medically stable patients with COVID-19.
Selectively cancel elective and non-urgent procedures and appointments for which a facemask is typically used by HCP.
Place facemasks in a secure and monitored site and provide facemasks to symptomatic patients upon check-in at entry points.
Healthcare facilities can consider removing all facemasks from public areas.
Facemasks can be available to provide to symptomatic patients upon check in at entry points.
All facemasks should be placed in a secure and monitored site.
This is especially important in high-traffic areas like emergency departments.
Extended use of facemasks is the practice of wearing the same facemask for repeated close contact encounters with several different patients, without removing the facemask between patient encounters.
Restrict facemasks for use by HCP, rather than asymptomatic patients (who might use cloth masks) for source control.
Have patients with symptoms of respiratory infection use tissues or other barriers to cover their mouth and nose.
Cancel all elective and non-urgent procedures and appointments for which a facemask is typically used by HCP.
Use facemasks beyond the manufacturer-designated shelf life during patient care activities.
If there is no date available on the facemask label or packaging, facilities should contact the manufacturer.
The user should visually inspect the product prior to use and, if there are concerns (such as degraded materials or visible tears), discard the product.
Implement limited re-use of facemasks.
Limited re-use of facemasks is the practice of using the same facemask by one HCP for multiple encounters with different patients but removing it after each encounter.
As it is unknown what the potential contribution of contact transmission is for SARS-CoV-2, care should be taken to ensure that HCP do not touch outer surfaces of the mask during care, and that mask removal and replacement be done in a careful and deliberate manner.
Prioritize facemasks for selected activities such as:
Exclude HCP at increased risk for severe illness from COVID-19 from contact with known or suspected COVID-19 patients.
During severe resource limitations, consider excluding HCP who may be at increased risk for severe illness from COVID-19, such as those of older age, those with chronic medical conditions, or those who may be pregnant, from caring for patients with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 infection.
Designate convalescent HCP for provision of care to known or suspected COVID-19 patients.
It may be possible to designate HCP who have clinically recovered from COVID-19 to preferentially provide care for additional patients with COVID-19.
Individuals who have recovered from COVID-19 infection may have developed some protective immunity, but this has not yet been confirmed.
Use a face shield that covers the entire front (that extends to the chin or below) and sides of the face with no facemask.
Consider use of expedient patient isolation rooms for risk reduction.
Portable fan devices with high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filtration that are carefully placed can increase the effective air changes per hour of clean air to the patient room, reducing risk to individuals entering the room without respiratory protection.
NIOSH has developed guidance for using portable HEPA filtration systems to create expedient patient isolation rooms.
The expedient patient isolation room approach involves establishing a high-ventilation-rate, negative pressure, inner isolation zone that sits within a clean larger ventilated zone.
Consider use of ventilated headboards
NIOSH has developed the ventilated headboard that draws exhaled air from a patient in bed into a HEPA filter, decreasing risk of HCP exposure to patient-generated aerosol.
This technology consists of lightweight, sturdy, and adjustable aluminum framing with a retractable plastic canopy.
The ventilated headboard can be deployed in combination with HEPA fan/filter units to provide surge isolation capacity within a variety of environments, from traditional patient rooms to triage stations, and emergency medical shelters.
HCP use of homemade masks:
In settings where facemasks are not available, HCP might use homemade masks for care of patients with COVID-19 as a last resort.
However, homemade masks are not considered PPE, since their capability to protect HCP is unknown.
Caution should be exercised when considering this option.
Homemade masks should ideally be used in combination with a face shield that covers the entire front (that extends to the chin or below) and sides of the face.
Audience: These considerations are intended for use by federal, state, and local public health officials, respiratory protection program managers, leaders in occupational health services and infection prevention and control programs, and other leaders in healthcare settings who are responsible for developing and implementing policies and procedures for preventing pathogen transmission in healthcare settings.
Purpose: This document offers a series of strategies or options to optimize supplies of disposable N95 filtering facepiece respirators (commonly called N95 respirators) in healthcare settings when there is limited supply.
It does not address other aspects of pandemic planning; for those, healthcare  facilities can refer to COVID-19 preparedness plans.
The strategies are also listed in order of priority and preference in the Checklist for Healthcare Facilities:  Strategies for Optimizing the Supply of N95 Respirators during the COVID-19 Response in an easy-to-use format for healthcare facilities.
Controlling exposures to occupational hazards is a fundamental way to protect personnel.
Conventionally, a hierarchy has been used to achieve feasible and effective controls.
Multiple control strategies can be implemented concurrently and or sequentially.
This hierarchy can be represented as follows:
To prevent infectious disease transmission, elimination (physically removing the hazard) and substitution (replacing the hazard) are not typically options for healthcare settings.
However, exposures to transmissible respiratory pathogens in healthcare facilities can often be reduced or possibly avoided through engineering and administrative controls and PPE.
Prompt detection and effective triage and isolation of potentially infectious patients are essential to prevent unnecessary exposures among patients, healthcare personnel (HCP), and visitors at the facility.
N95 respirators are the PPE most often used to control exposures to infections transmitted via the airborne route, though their effectiveness is highly dependent upon proper fit and use.
N95 respirators are intended to be used once and then properly disposed of and replaced with a new N95 respirator.
The optimal way to prevent airborne transmission is to use a combination of interventions from across the hierarchy of controls, not just PPE alone.
Applying a combination of controls can provide an additional degree of protection, even if one intervention fails or is not available.
Respirators, when required to protect HCP from airborne contaminants such as some infectious agents, must be used in the context of a comprehensive, written respiratory protection program that meets the requirements of OSHAs Respiratory Protection standardexternal icon.
The program should include medical evaluations, training, and fit testing.
Surge capacity refers to the ability to manage a sudden increase in patient volume that would severely challenge or exceed the present capacity of a facility.
While there are no commonly accepted measurements or triggers to distinguish surge capacity from daily patient care capacity, surge capacity is a useful framework to approach a decreased supply of N95 respirators during the COVID-19 response.
To help healthcare facilities plan and optimize the use of respiratory protection in response to COVID-19, CDC has developed a Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) Burn Rate Calculator.
Three general strata have been used to describe surge capacity and can be used to prioritize measures to conserve N95 respirator supplies along the continuum of care.1 
CDCs optimization strategies for N95 respirator supply offer a continuum of options for use when PPE supplies are stressed, running low, or exhausted.
Contingency and then crisis capacity measures augment conventional capacity measures and are meant to be considered and implemented sequentially.
As N95 respirator availability returns to normal, healthcare facilities should promptly resume conventional practices.
Engineering controls reduce exposures for HCP by placing a barrier between the hazard and the HCP.
Engineering controls can be very effective as part of a suite of strategies to protect HCP without placing primary responsibility of implementation on them (i.e they function without HCP having to take an action).
Aerosol-generating procedures performed on patients with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 patients should take place in an airborne infection isolation room (AIIR).
The AIIR should be constructed and maintained in accordance with current guidelines, as recommended in CDCs COVID-19 interim prevention and control recommendations in healthcare settings.
Air from these rooms should be exhausted directly to the outside or be filtered through a high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter directly before recirculation.
Air from these rooms should be exhausted directly to the outside or be filtered through a high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter directly before recirculation.
Barriers such as glass or plastic windows can be an effective solution for reducing exposures among HCP to potentially infectious patients.
This approach can be effective in reception areas (e.g intake desk at emergency department, triage station, information booth, pharmacy drop-off/pick-up windows) where patients may first report upon arrival to a healthcare facility.
Other examples include the use of curtains between patients in shared areas and closed suctioning systems for airway suctioning for intubated patients.
Another cornerstone of engineering controls are ventilation systems that provide air movement from a clean (HCP workstation or area) to contaminated (sick patient) flow direction (along with appropriate filtration, exchange rate) that are installed and properly maintained.
Administrative controls are employer-dictated work practices and policies that reduce or prevent hazardous exposures.
Their effectiveness depends on employer commitment and HCP acceptance and consistent use of the strategies.
Develop mechanisms to screen patients for acute respiratory illness prior to their healthcare visits, such as through the appointment reminder system.
Postpone and reschedule those with signs and symptoms presenting for non-acute visits.
Nurse advice lines and telemedicine can screen and manage patients with suspected COVID-19 without the need for a face-to-face visit.
Promoting the use of these technologies and referral networks can help triage persons to the appropriate level of care, potentially reducing the influx of patients to healthcare facilities and reserving personal protective equipment for when it is needed.
CDC guidance recommends that, for COVID-19, only essential personnel enter the patient care area, and that facilities consider caring for these patients with dedicated HCP.
Further limiting the numbers of healthcare personnel and patient contacts to those that are medically essential (e.g excluding dietary personnel, environmental services) could limit the number of respirators used.
The medically essential personnel would assume food delivery and environmental services.
Measures can be explored to limit face-to-face contact encounters between HCP and patients with confirmed or suspected COVID-19.
HCP may consider bundling care activities to minimize room entries, and bundling may occur across HCP types (e.g food trays are delivered by HCP performing other care).
Alternative mechanisms for HCP and patient interactions include telephones, video monitoring, and video-call applications on cell phones or tablets.
Restrict visitors from entering the rooms of patients with known COVID-19 or suspected COVID-19, as recommended in CDCs guidance.
Alternative mechanisms for patient and visitor interactions, such as video-call applications on cell phones or tablets should be explored.
Facilities can consider exceptions based on end-of-life situations or when a visitor is essential for the patients emotional well-being and care.
If visitors must enter the room of a known or suspected COVID-19 patient, facilities should provide instruction, before visitors enter patients rooms on use of PPE according to current facility policy while in the patients room.
Identify and assess patients who may be ill with or who may have been exposed to a person with known COVID-19.
Patients with symptoms of suspected COVID-19 or other respiratory infection (e.g fever, cough) presenting for care should use facemaskspdf icon for source control until they can be placed in a private room.
Instructions should include how to use facemasks.
Patients with these symptoms should not wear N95 respirators.
If these patients need to leave their room for services in other areas of the hospital (e.g radiology), they should also wear facemasks for source control.
Cohorting is the practice of grouping together patients who are infected with the same organism to confine their care to one area and prevent contact with other patients.
Cohorts are created based on clinical diagnosis, microbiologic confirmation when available, epidemiology, and mode of transmission of the infectious agent.
Cohorting has been used extensively for managing outbreaks of multidrug resistant organisms including MRSA, VRE, MDR-ESBLs, Pseudomonas aeruginosa; methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus, RSV, adenovirus keratoconjunctivitis, rotavirus, and SARS.
When single patient rooms are not available, patients with confirmed COVID-19 may be placed in the same room.
Cohorting patients could minimize respirator use when extended wear of respirators is implemented.
For more information on cohorting of patients, refer to 2007 Guideline for Isolation  Precautions: Preventing Transmission of Infectious Agents in Healthcare Settingspdf icon.
Assigning designated teams of HCP to provide care for all patients with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 could minimize respirator use when extended wear of respirators is implemented.
This strategy can also limit the number of exposed HCP who need to be fit tested.
It is important that HCP be trained on indications for use of N95 respirators.
The OSHA Respiratory Protection standard requires employers to provide respirator training to an employee prior to use in the workplace.
For example, HCP should be educated on the use of N95 respirators when caring for patients managed with airborne precautions, and other instances for respirator use, such as the performance of aerosol generating procedures.
Training employees on the proper use of respirators, including putting on and removing them, limitations on their use, and maintenance is essential for effective use of respiratory protection.
HCP should be thoroughly trained before they are fit tested to ensure they are comfortable donning the respirator and know how to conduct a user seal check.
HCP should be trained on the respirator they are expecting to use at work.
Just-in-time fit testing refers to the capacity of healthcare facilities to do larger scale evaluation, training, and fit testing of employees when necessary during a pandemic.
Facilities may adopt a plan to use the just-in-time method for fit testing, which has been incorporated into pandemic plans for many facilities.
For large facilities, it may not be feasible to fit test all employees, especially if their job does not typically place them at risk for exposure to airborne infectious diseases such as tuberculosis.
If healthcare facilities are expecting to receive COVID-19 patients, they should begin training and start to plan for fit testing now.
It is essential to have HCP trained and fit tested prior to receiving patients.
In order to conserve the supply of N95 respirators, healthcare facilities should understand which of their HCP need to be in a respiratory protection program and thus medically evaluated, trained, and fit tested.
If training and fit testing are conducted during two separate steps, it is possible to allow limited re-use of N95 respirators used by individual HCP during training and then fit testing.
Employees should be fit tested after they are comfortable donning the respirator and have passed a user seal check.
The respirator might also be saved and then used for patient care.
Respirator fit test methods are classified as either qualitative or quantitative, and there are multiple protocols of each classification that are NIOSH-recommended or meet the requirements of OSHAs Respiratory Protection Standardexternal icon.
A qualitative fit test is a pass/fail test to assess the adequacy of respirator fit that relies on the individuals sensory detection of a test agent.
A quantitative fit test numerically measures the effectiveness of the respirator to seal with the wearers face, without relying on the wearers voluntary or involuntary response to a test agent.
Quantitative fit tests involve adaptation of the respirator to the fit testing equipment, which can involve making holes in the respirator.
Many healthcare systems already use qualitative fit test methods for fit testing HCP.
For those using quantitative fit test methods, considerations can be made to use qualitative fit test methods to minimize the destruction of an N95 respirator used in fit testing and allow for the re-use of the same N95 respirator by the HCP.
In March 2020, OSHA recommendedexternal icon healthcare employers consider changing from a quantitative fit testing method to a qualitative fit testing method.
Qualitative fit methods may also allow for rapid fit testing of larger numbers of HCP.
Any switch in methods should be assessed to ensure proficiency of the fit testers in carrying out the test.
While engineering and administrative controls should be considered first when selecting controls, the use of personal protective equipment (PPE) should also be part of a suite of strategies used to protect personnel.
Proper use of respiratory protection by HCP requires a comprehensive program (including medical clearance, training, and fit testing) that complies with OSHAs Respiratory Protection Standardexternal icon and a high level of HCP involvement and commitment.
The program should also include provisions for the cleaning, disinfecting, inspection, repair, and storage of respirators used by HCP on the job according to manufacturers instructions.
Proper storage conditions can maximize shelf life of respirators.
The following strategies in this section are traditionally used by some healthcare systems.
If not already implemented, these strategies can be considered by healthcare settings in the face of a potential N95 respirator shortage before implementing the contingency strategies that are listed further below.
N95 respirators include standard and surgical N95 respirators.
In the United States, all N95 respirators used in occupational settings are approved by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) and used in accordance with OSHA standards.
A surgical N95 respirator is a NIOSH-approved N95 respirator that has also been cleared by the FDA as a surgical mask.
Surgical N95 respirators (sometimes called medical respirators) are recommended only for use by HCP who need protection from both airborne and fluid hazards, such as  splashes or sprays.
In times of shortage, only HCP who are working in a sterile field or who may be exposed to high-velocity splashes, sprays, or splatters of blood or body fluids should be provided these respirators.
Other HCP can use standard N95 respirators.
If surgical N95 respirators are not available, and there is a risk that the worker may be exposed to high velocity splashes, sprays, or splatters of blood or body fluids, then a faceshield should be worn over the standard N95 respirator.
Use NIOSH approved alternatives to N95 respiratorspdf icon where feasible.
These include other classes of filtering facepiece respirators, elastomeric half-mask and full facepiece air purifying respirators, powered air purifying respirators (PAPRs).
All of these alternatives will provide equivalent or higher protection than N95 respirators when properly worn.
NIOSH maintains a searchable, online version of the certified equipment list identifying all NIOSH-approved respirators.
Every other NIOSH approved filtering facepiece respirators is at least as protective as the N95.
These include N99, N100, P95, P99, P100, R95, R99, and R100.
Many filtering facepiece respirators have exhalation valves and should not be used in surgical settings as unfiltered exhaled breath would compromise the sterile field.
On March 2, 2020, FDA issued an Emergency Use Authorization (EUA)external icon authorizing the use of certain NIOSH-approved respirator models in healthcare settings.
Elastomeric respirators are half-facepiece, tight-fitting respirators that are made of synthetic or rubber material permitting them to be repeatedly disinfected, cleaned, and reused.
They are equipped with replaceable filter cartridges.
Similar to N95 respirators, elastomeric respirators require annual fit testing.
Elastomeric respirators should not be used in surgical settings due to concerns that air coming out of the exhalation valve may contaminate the sterile field.
PAPRs are reusable respirators that are typically loose-fitting hoods or helmets.
These respirators are battery-powered with blower that pulls air through attached filters or cartridges.
The filter is typically a high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter.
Loose-fitting PAPRs do not require fit-testing and can be worn by people with facial hair.
However, PAPRs should not be used in surgical settings due to concerns that the blower exhaust and exhaled air may contaminate the sterile field.
On March 28, 2020, FDA issued an update to address NIOSH-Approved Air Purifying Respirators for Use in Health Care Settings During Response to the COVID-19 Public Health Emergencyexternal icon.
Facilities using elastomeric respirators and PAPRs should have up-to-date cleaning/disinfection procedures, which are an essential part of use for protection against infectious agents.
Decisions to implement contingency are based upon these assumptions:
Currently, CDC recommends discharge of patients with confirmed COVID-19 when they are medically stable and have an appropriate home environment to which to return.
CDC lists considerations for care at home in: Interim Guidance for Implementing Home Care of People Not Requiring Hospitalization for Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
If patients cannot be discharged to home for social rather than medical reasons, public health officials might need to identify alternative non-hospital housing where those patients can convalesce.
Facilities can consider temporarily suspending annual fit testing of HCP in times of expected shortages.
In March 2020, OSHA issued new temporary guidanceexternal icon regarding the enforcement of OSHAs Respiratory Protection Standard.
The guidance gave OSHA field offices enforcement discretion concerning the annual fit testing requirement as long as HCP have undergone an initial fit test with the same model, style, and size.
Other conditions include explaining to HCP the importance of conducting a user seal check each time the respirator is put on and conducting a fit test if there are visual changes to the employees physical condition.
In times of shortage, consideration can be made to use N95 respirators beyond the manufacturer-designated shelf life.
However, expired respirators might not perform to the requirements for which they were certified.
Over time, components such as the strap and material may degrade, which can affect the quality of the fit and seal.
Because of this, use of expired respirators could be prioritized for situations where HCP are NOT exposed to pathogens, such as training and fit testing.
As expired respirators can still serve an important purpose, healthcare facilities should retain and reserve all N95 respirators during the pandemic.
Practices allowing extended use of N95 respirators, when acceptable, can also be considered.
The decision to implement policies that permit extended use of N95 respirators should be made by the professionals who manage the institutions respiratory protection program, in consultation with their occupational health and infection control departments with input from the state/local public health departments.
CDC has recommended guidance on implementation of extended use of N95 respirators in healthcare settings.
Extended use has been recommended and widely used as an option for conserving respirators during previous respiratory pathogen outbreaks and pandemics.
Extended use refers to the practice of wearing the same N95 respirator for repeated close contact encounters with several different patients, without removing the respirator between patient encounters.
Extended use is well suited to situations wherein multiple patients with the same infectious disease diagnosis, whose care requires use of a respirator, are cohorted (e.g housed on the same hospital unit).
It can also be considered to be used for care of patients with tuberculosis, varicella, and measles, other infectious diseases where use of an N95 respirator or higher is recommended.
When practicing extended use of N95 respirators, the maximum recommended extended use period is 8–12 hours.
Respirators should not be worn for multiple work shifts and should not be reused after extended use.
N95 respirators should be removed (doffed) and discarded before activities such as meals and restroom breaks.
Decisions to implement crisis strategies are based upon these assumptions:
Consideration can be made to use N95 respirators beyond the manufacturer-designated shelf life for care of patients with COVID-19, tuberculosis, measles, and varicella.
However, respirators beyond the manufacturer-designated shelf life may not perform to the requirements for which they were certified.
Over time, components such as the straps and nose bridge material may degrade, which can affect the quality of the fit and seal.
Many models found in U.S. stockpiles and stockpiles of healthcare facilities have been found to continue to perform in accordance with NIOSH performance standards.
However, fluid resistance and flammability were not assessed.
Use of the N95 respirators recommended in Release of Stockpiled N95 Filtering Facepiece Respirators Beyond the Manufacturer-Designated Shelf Life: Considerations for the COVID-19 Response can be considered.
It is optimal to use these respirators in the context of a respiratory protection program that includes medical evaluation, training, and fit testing.
If used in healthcare delivery, it is particularly important that HCP perform the expected seal check, prior to entering a patient care area.
CDC does not recommend using N95s beyond the manufacturer-designated shelf life in surgical settings.
On March 2, 2020, FDA issued an Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) authorizing the use of certain NIOSH-approved respirator models in healthcare settings.
This EUA includes respirator units that are past their designated shelf life.
Other countries approve respirators for occupational use according to country-specific standards.
These products are evaluated using some methods that are similar to those used by NIOSH.
Some methods are different but are expected to provide protection similar to NIOSH-approved filtering facepiece and elastomeric respirators.
Devices supplied by current NIOSH-approval holders producing respirators under the standards authorized in the listed countries are expected to provide the protection indicated, given that a proper fit is achieved.
Therefore, they are considered to be suitable alternatives to provide protection during the COVID-19 response when supplies are short.
Within the following tables, the country, conformity assessment standards, standards and guidance documents, acceptable product classification, and NIOSH classification are provided in alphabetical order.
All of these respirators have protection factors of at least 10 in the countries listed below, as outlined in the standards and guidance documents specified.
Non-NIOSH approved products developed by manufacturers who are not NIOSH approval holders are expected to meet the performance requirements if they have been issued a certificate of approval by an authorized test laboratory indicating they conform to the standards below.
Non-NIOSH-approved products developed by manufacturers who are not NIOSH approval holders, including only products approved by and received from China, should only be used in crisis situations when no other NIOSH-approved N95 respirator (or a listed device from one of the other countries identified within the FDA EAU) is available; they should not be used during aerosol generating medical procedures unless the alternative is a loose-fitting surgical mask or improvised device.
On April 3, 2020, FDA issued an update to the Non-NIOSH Approved Respirator Emergency Use Authorization (EUA)external icon concerning non-NIOSH-approved respirators that have been approved in other countries.
Visit the NIOSH Science Blog for additional information on understanding the use of imported Non-NIOSH-approved respirators.
Show More
Re-use refers to the practice of using the same N95 respirator by one HCP for multiple encounters with different patients but removing it (i.e.
doffing) after each encounter.
This practice is often referred to as limited reuse because restrictions are in place to limit the number of times the same respirator is reused.
It is important to consult with the respirator manufacturer regarding the maximum number of donnings or uses they recommend for the N95 respirator model.
If no manufacturer guidance is available, data suggest limiting the number of reuses to no more than five uses per device to ensure an adequate safety margin.1 N95 and other disposable respirators should not be shared by multiple HCP.
CDC has recommended guidance on implementation of limited re-use of N95 respirators in healthcare settings.
For pathogens for which contact transmission is not a concern, routine limited reuse of single-use disposable respirators has been practiced for decades.
For example, for tuberculosis prevention, a respirator classified as disposable can be reused by the same provider as long as the respirator maintains its structural and functional integrity.
If reuse must be implemented in times of shortages, HCP could be encouraged to reuse their N95 respirators when caring for patients with tuberculosis disease first.
Limited re-use of N95 respirators when caring for patients with COVID-19 might also become necessary.
However, it is unknown what the potential contribution of contact transmission is for SARS-CoV-2, and caution should be used.
Re-use should be implemented according to CDC guidance.
Re-use has been recommended as an option for conserving respirators during previous respiratory pathogen outbreaks and pandemics.
During times of crisis, practicing limited re-use while also implementing extended use can be considered.
It may also be necessary to re-use N95 respirators when caring for patients with varicella or measles, although contact transmission poses a risk to HCP who implement this practice.
Ideally, N95 respirators should not be re-used by HCP who care for patients with COVID-19 then care for other patients with varicella, measles, and tuberculosis, and vice versa.
Respirators grossly contaminated with blood, respiratory or nasal secretions, or other bodily fluids from patients should be discarded.
HCP can consider using a face shield or facemask over the respirator to reduce/prevent contamination of the N95 respirator.
HCP re-using an N95 respirators should use a clean pair of gloves when donning or adjusting a previously worn N95 respirator.
It is important to discard gloves and perform hand hygiene after the N95 respirator is donned or adjusted.
The surfaces of a properly donned and functioning NIOSH-approved N95 respirator will become contaminated with pathogens while filtering the inhalation air of the wearer during exposures to pathogen laden aerosols.
The pathogens on the filter materials of the respirator may be transferred to the wearer upon contact with the respirator during activities such as adjusting the respirator, improper doffing of the respirator, or when performing a user-seal check when redonnng a previously worn respirator.
One effective strategy to mitigate the contact transfer of pathogens from the respirator to the wearer could be to issue each HCP who may be exposed to COVID-19 patients a minimum of five respirators.
Each respirator will be used on a particular day and stored in a breathable paper bag until the next week.
This will result in each worker requiring a minimum of five N95 respirators if they put on, take off, care for them, and store them properly each day.
This amount of time in between uses should exceed the 72 hour expected survival time for SARS-CoV2 (the virus that caused COVID-19).3 HCP should still treat the respirator as though it is still contaminated and follow the precautions outlined in CDCs re-use recommendations.
Respirator manufacturers may provide guidance for respirator decontamination.
At present, there are no generally approved methods for N95 and other disposable respirator decontamination prior to re-use.
Additional guidance on potential methods may be found here.
Use of additional N95 respirators beyond the manufacturer-designated shelf life for care of patients with COVID-19, tuberculosis, measles, and varicella can be considered.
However, respirators beyond the manufacturer-designated shelf life may not perform to the requirements for which they were certified.
Over time, components such as the straps and nose bridge material may degrade, which can affect the quality of the fit and seal.
Some models have been found NOT to perform in accordance with NIOSH performances standards, and consideration may be given to use these respirators as identified in Release of Stockpiled N95 Filtering Facepiece Respirators Beyond the Manufacturer-Designated Shelf Life: Considerations for the COVID-19 Response.
In addition, consideration can be given to use N95 respirators that have not been evaluated by NIOSH beyond the manufacturer-designated shelf life.
These respirators should ideally be used in the context of a respiratory protection program that includes medical evaluation, training, and fit testing.
It is particularly important that HCP perform the expected seal check, prior to entering a patient care area.
The number of infectious particles required to cause an infection (infectious dose) is often uncertain or unknown for respiratory pathogens.
Further, there is often uncertainty about the influence of factors such as exposure duration and nature of clinical symptoms on the likelihood of infection transmission from person-to-person.
When facemasks must be used by HCP entering a patient care area, source control (i.e.
masking of symptomatic patients) and maintaining distance from the patient are particularly important to reduce the risk of transmission.
This prioritization approach to conservation is intended to be used when N95 respirators are so limited that routinely practiced standards of care for all HCP wearing N95 respirators when caring for a COVID-19 patient are no longer possible.
N95 respirators beyond their manufacture-designated shelf life, when available, are preferable to use of facemasks.
The use of N95s or elastomeric respirators or PAPRs should be prioritized for HCP with the highest potential exposures including being present in the room during aerosol generating procedures performed on symptomatic persons.
However, HCP should consider not entering the patient care area.
However, HCP should consider not entering the patient care area.
During severe resource limitations, consider excluding HCP who may be at increased risk for severe illness from COVID-19, such as those of older age, those with chronic medical conditions, or those who may be pregnant, from caring for patients with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 infection.
It may be possible to designate HCP who have clinically recovered from COVID-19 to preferentially provide care for additional patients with COVID-19.
Individuals who have recovered from COVID-19 infection may have developed some protective immunity, but this has not yet been proven.
Portable fan devices with high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filtration that are carefully placed can increase the effective air changes per hour of clean air to the patient room, reducing risk to individuals entering the room without respiratory protection.
NIOSH has developed guidance for using portable HEPA filtration systems to create expedient patient isolation rooms.
The expedient patient isolation room approach involves establishing a high-ventilation-rate, negative pressure, inner isolation zone that sits within a clean larger ventilated zone.
In the absence of any remaining supply of N95 respirators, it may be possible to use this technology in conjunction with HCP wearing facemasks.
NIOSH has developed the ventilated headboard that draws exhaled air from a patient in bed into a HEPA filter, decreasing risk of HCP exposure to patient-generated aerosol.
This technology consists of lightweight, sturdy, and adjustable aluminum framing with a retractable plastic canopy.
The ventilated headboard can be deployed in combination with HEPA fan/filter units to provide surge isolation capacity within a variety of environments, from traditional patient rooms to triage stations, and emergency medical shelters.
In the absence of any remaining supply of N95 respirators, it may be possible to use this technology in conjunction with HCP and/or patients wearing facemasks.
Who this guidance is for: use by federal, state, and local public health officials, respiratory protection program managers, occupational health service leaders, infection prevention and control program leaders, and other leaders in healthcare settings who are responsible for developing and implementing policies and procedures for preventing pathogen transmission in healthcare settings.
Purpose: This webpage describes considerations for the use of powered air-purifying respirators (PAPRs) to provide respiratory protection to healthcare practitioners (HCP) as a component of a formally developed and implemented written respiratory protection program.
It addresses conventional, contingency, and crisis surge PAPR use and maintenance practices.
This interim guidance is based on what is currently known about the transmission and severity of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) will update this guidance as needed and as additional information becomes available.
Please check the CDC COVID-19 website periodically for updated interim guidance.
Conventional capacity strategies should be incorporated into everyday practices.
Contingency capacity strategies should be used when shortages are predicted but supplies are available.
Crisis capacity strategies should be used during known shortages.
NIOSH-approved respirators are available in many types, models, and sizes from many manufacturers for a wide variety of uses in many occupational settings.
The most common types of respirators in healthcare are N95 filtering facepiece respirators (FFRs), surgical N95 FFRs, and PAPRs.
Of these three options, many healthcare practitioners are the least familiar with PAPRs.
A PAPR is an air-purifying respirator that uses a blower to force air through filter cartridges or canisters and into the breathing zone of the wearer.
This process creates an air flow inside either a tight-fitting facepiece or loose-fitting hood or helmet, providing a higher assigned protection factor (APF) than the reusable elastomeric non-powered air-purifying half facepiece (half mask) or N95 FFRs.
A PAPR can be used for protection during healthcare procedures in which HCP are exposed to greater risks of aerosolized pathogens causing acute respiratory infections.
A PAPR may have a tight-fitting half or full facepiece or a loose-fitting facepiece, hood, or helmet.
It has an OSHA APF of at least 25 for loose-fitting hoods and helmets, 50 for tight-fitting half masks, and 1,000 for full facepiece types and some loose-fitting hoods and helmets where the manufacturers testing has demonstrated an APF of 1,000.
CDC has published recommendations for HCP respiratory protection and of commonly used NIOSH-approved, FDA-cleared, single-use filtering facepiece N95 surgical respirators.1 Properly fitted FFR and half facepiece reusable elastomeric respirators are expected to reduce exposures to one-tenth of the concentration that is in the air, based on OSHAs APF of 10 for these respirator types.
All PAPR APFs exceed the APF of 10 for N95 FFR or elastomeric half facepiece respirators.2
PAPRs reduce the aerosol concentration inhaled by the wearer to at least 1/25th of that in the air, compared to a 1/10th reduction for FFRs and elastomeric half facepiece air-purifying respirators.
OSHA assigns an APF of 1,000 to some PAPRs with hoods or helmets.
However, employers must have evidence provided by the respirator manufacturer that testing of these respirators demonstrates performance at a level of protection of 1,000 to receive an APF of 1,000.
Absent such evidence, PAPRs with loose-fitting helmets or hoods have an APF of 25.
When used properly, PAPRs provide increased protection and decrease the likelihood of infection transmission to the wearer as compared to FFRs and half face reusable elastomeric respirators.
A variety of NIOSH-approved PAPR designs are available.
Examples include those with tight-fitting facepieces and loose-fitting hoods or helmets, blower styles, battery types (e.g Lithium ion, Nickel-Metal hydride, Nickel Cadmium) or over-the-counter disposable batteries, and high efficiency (HE) filters or filter cartridges.
HE filters are 99.97% efficient against 0.3 micron particles.
A PAPR may have adjustable air flow rates for added comfort and a range of cartridge protections some of which are solely for particulates (HE filters) and others which also protect against chemical gases and vapors that can be used to help protect against hazards associated with the handling of certain hazardous drugs and cleaning/disinfecting operations.
The substantial PAPR product diversity provides flexibility to customize protection needed in a healthcare setting.
Loose-fitting NIOSH-approved PAPRs have several advantages over tight-fitting non-powered approved air-purifying respirators, including3:
The facility should assess the limitations and factors associated with using PAPRs when considering their use in healthcare settings, including:
NOTE: PAPR HE filters used in industry are generally re-used until they are soiled, damaged, or reduce PAPR air flow below specified levels.
Caution should be used when using the filter for a live virus, and a practical replacement cycle should be implemented until more is known.
When respirators, including PAPRs, are used to reduce inhalation exposures, OSHA requires a written respiratory protection program in compliance with OSHA 29CFR1910.134, and the respirators must be NIOSH-approved.4 To be considered NIOSH-approved, the PAPR assembly cannot be modified from its approved configuration, and only those replacement parts specified and provided by the manufacturer must be used.
The manufacturers PAPR instructions are specific to a respirator models materials and specifications.
Instructions are generally provided with the PAPR facepiece, blower, and battery packaging.
All instructions must be carefully followed.
OSHA also permits employers to use the cleaning recommendations provided by the manufacturer of the respirator, provided such procedures are as effective as those listed in Appendix B- 2, meaning that the respirator is properly cleaned and disinfected in a manner that prevents damage to the respirator and does not cause harm (e.g skin irritation) to the user.5
PAPRs may be used in healthcare for a variety of applications.
Because they provide higher APFs than N95 FFRs and reusable elastomeric half facepiece respirators, PAPRs are suitable for use when aerosol-generating procedures are performed, by hospital first receivers, or when the respirator user is not able to wear a tight-fitting respirator.
For effective use, PAPR manufacturer instructions must be followed.
The components of NIOSH-approved PAPRs vary considerably among manufacturers, and they react differently to cleaning and disinfection solutions and procedures.
Manufacturers cleaning and disinfection solutions and procedures also vary.
These important maintenance activities can cause damage or deteriorate PAPR facepieces, headgear components (hoods, helmets), breathing tubes (hoses), and batteries.
If cleaning and disinfection solutions and procedures are ineffective, HCP may be at risk of contact transmission.
For these reasons, manufacturers generally recommend that the filter component be discarded.
Some employers may be able to follow manufacturer-specific instructions for conventional use, but the cost of doing so may make PAPRs a less desirable solution to achieve the necessary protection.
PAPR use requires a robust maintenance program for repairing or replacing components that have become damaged during use, or during cleaning and disinfection and battery management procedures.6 Competent, trained staff are required to support the PAPR maintenance program.
Manufacturers recommend cleaning and disinfection procedures for PAPR components except for the HE filter/cartridge, which they generally recommend be discarded and replaced.
Filter cartridges can be reused until they become so clogged that they reduce airflow or become visibly soiled or damaged.
Clogging is not expected to be a factor in non-dusty environments such as healthcare settings.
The outside of the filter cartridge can have surface cleaning and decontamination while the rest of the unit is being serviced.
Viruses and bacteria causing acute respiratory infections can survive on respirator components for variable periods of time, from hours to weeks.
Consequently, contaminated respirators must be handled, cleaned, and disinfected properly to reduce the possibility of the device serving as a fomite and contributing to disease transmission.7 According to OSHA, the employer may use other commercially available cleansers of equivalent disinfection quality if their use is recommended or approved by the respirator manufacturer.
Conventional use requires cleaning and disinfecting using either the procedures in OSHAs Respiratory Protection Standard or the procedures recommended by the respirator manufacturer, provided they are at least as effective as OSHAs.8 If an alternate procedure is used to clean and disinfect the PAPR and its components, it must be recommended or approved by the manufacturer.
In general, cleaning and disinfecting consists of dissembling the PAPR, cleaning and disinfecting components, thoroughly rinsing components, and reassembling the PAPR when components are dry.
It is important to follow all steps set forth in the manufacturers instructions.
Cleaning is recommended after each use, but the PAPR must be cleaned as often as necessary to prevent them from becoming unsanitary.
As with reusable elastomeric respirators, manufacturers generally recommend PAPR HE filters and filter cartridges are not to be cleaned or disinfected.
Unlike reusable elastomeric respirators, PAPRs use only HE filters.
These filters can differ in their appearance and their attachment on, or fit into, the blower assembly.
Routine maintenance is also required for battery charging, and/or replacement.
The maintenance program for PAPRs requires a supply of replacement components, including HE filters/cartridges to support and maintain PAPR use.
CDC has provided thorough information on disinfecting equipment and surfaces potentially contaminated by coronaviruses.9 Specific instructions for cleaning and disinfecting PAPRs are not addressed.
Some disinfectants are powerful germicides, and their use requires special precautions such as adequate ventilation, use of clean non-sterile gloves, gowns, or face shields.
Care must be taken during cleaning and disinfection to ensure the cleaning staff does not self-infect or injure themselves performing this work.
Cleaning and disinfection must be done by competent trained individuals.
Centralizing this activity can ensure it is properly done.
Because of necessity, PAPR components including filters may be treated differently for their cleaning and disinfection.
Whereas conventional practice is to discard the filters after each use, contingency or crisis practices may necessitate cleaning and disinfecting the filter.
The performance of some filter media can be degraded by contact with the disinfectant.
The effectiveness of an alternate filter cartridge disinfection solution and procedure may be uncertain:
Some PAPRs have  filter cartridges or blower assemblies that prevent disinfectant contact with the filter media.
If available, these PAPRs should be used in the contingency or crisis capacity strategy approaches.
These PAPR designs provide added assurance that the filter media will not be contacted with the cleaning and disinfection solutions.
These filter cartridges, as well as PAPR blowers may be wiped down repeatedly.
NOTE: PAPR HE filters used in industry are generally re-used until they are soiled, damaged, or reduce PAPR air flow below specified levels.
Caution should be used when using the filter for a live virus, and a practical replacement cycle should be implemented until more is known.
Practices not approved by the manufacturer can increase the risk and uncertainty of re-using damaged or degraded components.
This must be balanced against other available HCP protection options to sustain effective HCP protection and patient care.
Alternate procedures used during emergencies should be assessed and documented in the written RPP, including alternate cleaning and disinfection practices.
For disinfection, diluted household bleach solutions, alcohol solutions with at least 70% ethyl alcohol, and EPA-registered household disinfectants for use against coronaviruses are effective.
For use of diluted household bleach solutions, follow disinfectant manufacturers instructions for proper disinfectant application, PPE, and ventilation.
Products with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claims external iconare expected to be effective against SARS-CoV-2.
Follow the manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time, etc.).
Disinfectants listed on the EPAs Registered Antimicrobial Products for Use Against Novel Coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, could be used to inactivate the virus.10 Those intended for use with soft surfaces may be preferred.
CAUTION: The following may degrade or damage the respirator components.
The following is a general step-by-step process for cleaning and disinfecting PAPR components.
PAPR manufacturers may not authorize these steps; however, during crisis operations when conventional procedures are not feasible, these steps could extend the supply of PAPR components.
If alternate cleaning or disinfection instructions are authorized, it is important to follow the facilitys established infection control practices for cleaning organic and inorganic materials and infectious organisms including the virus that causes coronavirus disease 2019.
Healthcare practitioners should always wear the required proper personal protective equipment (PPE) during cleaning and disinfecting respirator components.
These workers should always follow the disinfecting agent manufacturers user instructions regarding usability, application, dilution ratio and contact time, and ensure all components are thoroughly rinsed with clean, warm water and thoroughly dried before use or storage.
In addition, PAPR facepieces or headgear worn by more than one user must be cleaned and disinfected before being worn by a different user in shared situations.
There are several basic steps to clean and disinfect PAPR components – dissemble, clean, disinfect, rinse and dry, inspect, repair or replace, and store.
The order and details of each step are important.
PAPR components can be stored and reassembled, or reassembly can be done before use.
PAPR components may become damaged or deteriorated with prolonged or extended use of disinfecting products.
Competent, trained staff must inspect the components of their PAPR following each disinfection and prior to re-use of components.
Additionally, the user should always inspect the components of their PAPR prior to each use and report any damaged components.
Damaged components should be repaired or replaced according to user instructions.
Alternate cleaning and disinfection procedures have been studied and found to be generally effective for use during a pandemic.12 13 Procedures were used to clean and disinfect components inoculated with H1N1 influenza A/PR/8/34 (ATCC VR-1469).
While these methods have been demonstrated to be effective at disinfecting PAPRs, caution should be used as some manufacturers have reported that PDI™ AF3 Saniwipes can damage some PAPR components.
The chemicals in them cause crazing (a rapid and sever embrittlement of plastics).
Chemical compatibility for PAPR components is not well understood.
These compounds are referred to as quaternary ammonium compounds, which PAPR manufacturers strongly recommend should be avoided.
These disinfectants have been shown to be incompatible with some materials and do not have proven efficacy against all microorganisms.11
If following these procedures and applying them to filter cartridges during periods when supplies are limited or not available, extreme care must be taken to prevent cleaning and disinfectant contact with the filter media.
External surfaces of filters cartridges should be carefully wiped, not dipped, soaked, or submerged when applying the cleaning and disinfectant solutions.
Practices not approved by the manufacturer can increase the risk and uncertainty of re-using damaged or degraded components.
This must be balanced against other available HCP protection options to sustain effective HCP protection and patient care when supplies are limited or not available.
Modified procedures used during emergencies, including alternate cleaning and disinfection practices, should be documented and evaluated frequently throughout the crisis operation.
1 CDC 2020.
Strategies for optimizing the supply of N95 respirators.
2 OSHA 2009.
Assigned Protection Factors: for the Revised Respiratory Protection Standard.
Available from:  https://www.osha.gov/Publications/3352-APF-respirators.htmlexternal icon
3 3M 2018.
Using PAPRS in Clinical and Healthcare Settings.
Available from:  https://workersafety.3m.com/using-paprs-clinical-healthcare-settings/external icon
4 OSHA 29CFR1910.134.
Available from: https://www.osha.gov/laws-regs/regulations/standardnumber/1910/1910.134external icon
5 OSHA 1910.134 App B-2 Respirator Cleaning Procedures (Mandatory).
Available from: https://www.osha.gov/laws-regs/regulations/standardnumber/1910/1910.134AppB2external icon
6 NIOSH 2013.
Getting Optimal Performance from a Powered Air-purifying Respirator (PAPR) Depends on the Condition of its Battery!
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, DHHS (NIOSH) Publication 2013-146, https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/2013-146/pdfs/2013-146.pdfpdf icon
7 WHO 2014.
Infection Prevention and Control of Epidemic-and Pandemic Prone Acute Respiratory Infections in Health Care.
Available from: https://www.who.int/csr/bioriskreduction/infection_control/publication/en/external icon
8 OSHA 2012.
Transcript for the OSHA training video entitled Maintenance &amp; Care of Respirators.
Available from: https://www.osha.gov/video/respiratory_protection/maintenance_transcript.htmlexternal icon
9 CDC 2019.
Guidelines for Disinfection and Sterilization in Healthcare Facilities, 2008.
Available from: https://www.cdc.gov/infectioncontrol/pdf/guidelines/disinfection-guidelines-H.pdfpdf icon
10 EPA 2020.
List N: disinfectants for use against SARS-CoV-2.
Available from: https://www.epa.gov/pe0sticide-registration/list-n-disinfectants-use-against-sars-cov-2external icon
11 Rutala WA, Weber DJ 2019.
Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee.
Guideline for Disinfection and Sterilization in Healthcare Facilities, 2008.
12 Lawrence C, Harnish DA, Sandoval-Powers M, Mills D, Bergman M, Heimbuch BK 2017.
Assessment of half-mask elastomeric respirator and powered air-purifying respirator reprocessing for an influenza pandemic.
Am J Infect Control, 45(12):1324-1330.
13 Applied Research Associates, Inc. 2019.
Research to Mitigate a Shortage of Respiratory Protection Devices During Public Health Emergencies.
Contract # HHSF22321400158C.
Available from: https://www.ara.com/sites/default/files/MitigateShortageofRespiratoryProtectionDevices.pdfpdf iconexternal icon
Conventional, Contingency, and Crisis Strategies
Who this guidance is for: Federal, state, and local public health officials, respiratory protection program managers, occupational health service leaders, infection prevention and control program leaders, and other leaders in healthcare settings who are responsible for developing and implementing policies and procedures for preventing pathogen transmission in healthcare settings.
Purpose: This webpage offers guidance for the use of reusable elastomeric particulate respirators to provide respiratory protection to healthcare practitioners (HCP) against pathogens as a component of a formally developed and implemented written respiratory protection program.
This guidance is based on what is currently known about the transmission and severity of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) will update this guidance as needed and as additional information becomes available.
Please check the CDC COVID-19 website periodically for updated guidance.
Conventional guidance is not applicable during the COVID-19 response when supplies are short.
HCP should follow the contingency and crisis strategies.
Elastomeric respirators, such as half facepiece or full facepiece tight-fitting respirators where the facepieces are made of synthetic or natural rubber material, can be repeatedly used, cleaned, disinfected, stored, and re-used.
They are available as alternatives to disposable half mask filtering facepiece respirators (FFRs), such as N95 FFRs, for augmenting the total supply of respirators available for use by HCP.
While elastomeric respirators are not cleared by FDA for fluid resistance, based on their NIOSH approval, they can provide at least equivalent protection to N95 FFRs.
Some types of elastomeric respirators can offer higher assigned protection factors (APFs) than N95 FFRs.
They are equipped with replaceable filter cartridges or flexible, disc or pancake-style filters, which are not housed in a cartridge body.
All elastomeric respirators equipped with the proper air-purification filters, cartridges, or canisters would also have utility in this application.
Elastomerics may also have sealing surfaces and adjustable straps that accommodate a better fit.
Because they can be re-used, elastomeric particulate respirators provide an alternative respiratory protection option to FFRs for protection against pathogens.
While this document focuses on respiratory protection for exposure to pathogens, these respirators may also serve as protection against other airborne hazards in healthcare settings.
However, they require maintenance and a supply of replaceable components including straps, inhalation and exhalation valves, valve covers, and filters, cartridges, or canisters.
This webinar provides an overview of respiratory protection and guidance surrounding supply shortages.
This webinar also provides information on infection prevention measures, strategies for optimizing the supply of N95 respirators, and a broad overview of the use of elastomeric respirators in healthcare.
Guidance on elastomeric respirators is currently in development.
Elastomeric respirators have the same basic requirements for an OSHA-approved respiratory protection program as filtering facepiece respirators, including medical evaluation, training, and fit testing.
However, they have additional maintenance requirements which also include cleaning and disinfection of the facepiece components such as straps, valves, and valve covers.
While it is often possible to decontaminate the hard outer casing of filters, the filter material itself typically cannot be cleaned or disinfected for reuse.
Instead, filter components should be discarded when they become damaged, soiled, or clogged.
There are several types of elastomeric respirators, half-facepiece or half mask (APF = 10)1 and full facepiece (APF = 50).
The specific cautions, limitations, and restrictions of use should be understood when determining whether to use these respirators in healthcare facilities.
Respirators with full facepieces have the same filter considerations but provide greater protection because of better sealing characteristics and less face seal leakage and also provide protection to more of the face and very importantly, the eyes.
Elastomeric respirators with exhalation valves should not be used in surgical settings due to concerns that unfiltered air coming out of the exhalation valve may contaminate the surgical field.
When respirators are used to protect against hazardous airborne exposures in the workplace, OSHA requires employers to develop and implement a written respiratory protection program that conforms to OSHA 29CFR1910.134 including initial and annual fit testing.1 The use of a NIOSH-approved respirator is required by OSHA.
OSHA also requires that respirators be used in conformance with the conditions of their NIOSH certification.
Hence, a NIOSH-approved respirator assembly cannot be modified, and only those replacement parts specified and provided by the manufacturer must be used.
The manufacturers instructions are specific to its respirator materials and specifications.
Manufacturer instructions are generally provided with the respirator facepiece packaging.
Appendix B-2 to OSHAs Respiratory Protection standard (29CFR1910.134external icon) provides general procedures for employers to use when cleaning respirators.
OSHA also permits employers to use the cleaning recommendations provided by the respirator manufacturer, if such procedures are as effective as those listed in Appendix B- 2, meaning that the respirator is properly cleaned and disinfected in a manner that prevents damage to the respirator and does not cause harm such as skin irritation to the user.
Generally, it is recommended that respirators be cleaned and disinfected immediately after doffing (i.e removing).
To avoid contact transmission, precautions should be taken during doffing and use.
Training on appropriate donning and doffing procedures should be provided to all employees expected to wear respirators.
Both CDC and OSHA have videos illustrating proper donning and doffing of the respirator.16 Elastomeric components vary among manufacturers and react differently to cleaning and disinfection solutions and procedures.
The respirator facepiece components such as facepiece, valves, and straps require maintenance including cleaning, disinfection and inspection prior to reuse.
OSHA only requires replacing filters where necessary, for example, when soiled, contaminated, or clogged.
Viruses and bacteria that cause acute respiratory infections can survive on respirator components for variable periods of time, from hours to weeks.
Consequently, contaminated respirators must be handled, cleaned, and disinfected carefully and properly to reduce the possibility of the device carrying infection and contributing to disease transmission.2 Manufacturers recommend cleaning and disinfection procedures for their elastomeric respirator components such as facepiece, valve covers, valves, and straps.
The materials that comprise the elastomeric components of NIOSH-approved respirators vary among manufacturers; consequently, cleaning and disinfection solutions and procedures recommended by manufacturers may also vary.
Manufacturers typically recommend that filter cartridges be discarded after each use when cleaning an elastomeric respirator.
Following manufacturer recommendations may be possible for some employers, but others may find discarding the filter component with each cleaning of an elastomeric respirator to be a cost factor when selecting between FFRs and elastomeric respirators, but especially in times of shortage, users may find it difficult to replace the filter cartridges due to supply difficulties.
OSHA only requires replacing filters where necessary, for example, when soiled, contaminated, or clogged.
Additionally, cleaning and disinfecting respirators can damage or deteriorate respirator facepiece component materials and adversely affect their performance when re-using after disinfection.
Three types or series of filters are available for use with reusable elastomeric respirators.
Filters are classified by their resistance to degradation by oil-based aerosols.
Manufacturers provide use-time limitations and other limitations or restrictions depending on the respirators intended use.
If the healthcare setting does not have any oil-based aerosols present, any filter series can be used.
Filters are available in three efficiency levels – 95, 99, 100.
Thus, a wide selection is potentially available for use to augment the overall supply of respirators in healthcare settings.
The half mask or facepiece type respirator with N-Series 95% efficiency level filters (N-95) has been determined to provide adequate protection in combination with other healthcare practice interventions such as hand washing, isolation, and spatial distance for the risks associated with the transmission of tuberculosis, influenza, and novel coronaviruses.3 4
Generally, in industrial settings, filters are replaced when soiled or contaminated, damaged, and when breathing resistance increases.
However, in healthcare settings breathing resistance will unlikely be a reason for filter replacement since filters should seldom if ever become loaded with heavy concentrations of dust.
Depending on use, one manufacturer recommends the filter be discarded after each use, while another recommends the filter cartridge be disposed no later than 30 days after the first use if no oil mists are present.5 6  The respirators other elastomeric components should not be cleaned with solvents (e.g acetone, ethanol) or exposed to temperatures greater than 50°C (122°F).
Cleaning and disinfection must be done using either the procedures in OSHAs Respiratory Protection Standard or the procedures recommended by the respirator manufacturer, provided they are at least as effective as OSHAs procedures.
The employer must consult with the manufacturer for the proper disinfectants/procedures and their potential impact upon its respirator facepiece components.
If it is determined that the disinfection solution and procedures do not degrade the facepiece components, it is possible the components can be re-used, subject to inspection by a qualified individual to determine whether the components need to be repaired or replaced.
Filter cartridges should be removed from the facepiece prior to cleaning and disinfecting the elastomeric facepiece components.
Generally, the facepiece components are removed from the facepiece to be cleaned and disinfected.
There are several basic steps to clean and disinfect a respirator – remove, clean, disinfect, rinse and dry, inspect and repair or replace, and store.
The order and details of each step are important.
And it is very important that respirators are thoroughly air dried prior to storage.
Some disinfectants are powerful germicides and their use requires special precautions such as adequate ventilation, use of clean non-sterile gloves, gowns, and/or face shields.
Therefore, cleaning and disinfection must be done by competent, trained individuals.
Centralizing this activity might help ensure that it is being properly executed.
Maintenance must be performed only by those individuals who have been trained in the task and are knowledgeable of the models being serviced.
Specially trained individuals (ideally the same people who clean and disinfect respirators) should also be employed to carefully inspect respirators after cleaning with attention to valves and straps.
Inspections should follow the manufacturers recommendations.
Only the original respirator manufacturers component parts should be stocked and available to replace damaged components when necessary.
Who this guidance is for: Those responsible for developing and implementing policies and procedures for preventing pathogen transmission in healthcare settings.
This includes federal, state, and local public health officials, respiratory protection program managers, occupational health service leaders, and infection prevention and control program leaders.
Purpose: This webpage describes options for deploying air-purifying reusable elastomeric particulate respirators to provide respiratory protection to healthcare practitioners (HCP) when supplies of N95 filtering facepiece respirators (FFRs), including surgical N95s, are limited or not available.
Strategies for reusable elastomeric respirator use in healthcare settings in conventional, non-surge demand situations, are discussed in Conventional Strategies.
Conventional use should adhere to OSHA requirements and manufacturer-specific recommended instructions.
Contingency capacity strategies are for emergency situations in which each elastomeric respirator is issued for the exclusive use of an individual employee.
The respirators are cleaned and disinfected as often as necessary to remain unsoiled and sanitary.
Their description and use should be part of a written OSHA respiratory protection program (RPP).
If there is deviation from the standard RPP, it should be authorized and documented by the programs administrator.
Crisis capacity strategies are for emergency use, limited respirator and/or respirator component supplies such as filters, cartridges, or canisters, and valves, and situations in which it is impossible for individual HCP to have a dedicated elastomeric respirator, for example when the same respirator must be used by multiple HCP.
When used by more than one HCP, respirators must be cleaned and disinfected before being worn by different individuals.
The use of elastomeric respirators should be part of a written OSHA RPP.
If there is any deviation from the conventional RPP, it should be authorized and documented by the programs administrator.
NIOSH-certified reusable elastomeric particulate respirators provide at least the same level of protection as N95 FFRs, and some types of elastomeric respirators can offer higher assigned protection factors than N95 FFRs.
The most significant difference between reusable elastomeric respirators and disposable FFRs is that reusable respirators must be maintained and inspected after each use, including cleaning and disinfection of the elastomeric components such as facepiece valves, valve covers, and straps.
When used in conventional workplace conditions, the filter, cartridge, or canister of a reusable elastomeric respirator is not cleaned or disinfected; it is discarded once damaged, soiled, or clogged.
Elastomeric respirators are equipped with replaceable filters.
Some replaceable filters are cartridge style in which the filtration media is housed inside of a cartridge.
Others consist of flexible, disc or pancake-style filters, in which the filter media are not housed within a cartridge body.
This document provides considerations for disinfecting the outside of a filter cartridge during contingency and crisis scenarios to increase the supply of respirators for protection during the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic.
However, there is an increased risk of contact transmission or damage to the filter cartridge that must be considered.
Reusable respirators described in this document include tight-fitting half-facepiece or full-facepiece elastomeric respirators that use replaceable filters, cartridges, or canisters and have facepieces made of synthetic or natural rubber material permitting repeated cleaning, disinfection, storage, and reuse.
They contain an exhalation valve and should not be used in surgical settings when there is concern that unfiltered air coming out of the exhalation valve may contaminate the surgical field.
As with N95 FFRs, reusable respirators require an RPP including, but not limited to, initial and annual fit testing, and a user seal check each time the respirator is used.
However, on March 14, 2020 OSHA issued Temporary Enforcement Guidanceexternal icon permitting OSHA field offices to exercise enforcement discretion regarding the annual fit testing requirements until further notice.7
NIOSH-approved, elastomeric respirators provide an alternative respiratory protection option capable of decreasing the total number of respirators required because they may be cleaned, disinfected, and reused numerous times, which should reduce the number of respirators needed when supplies are limited.8 However, a supply of elastomeric respirator facepiece components should be held in reserve to replace damaged or deteriorated parts, and supplies of replacement filters, cartridges, or canisters are also needed.
The filters of these respirators are at least as protective as the N95 FFRs and surgical N95 FFRs typically used in healthcare settings.
They are not cleared by FDA for fluid resistance and require maintenance including cleaning, disinfection, and inspection.
There are several types of filter media for use with NIOSH-approved reusable, half -facepiece elastomeric respirators.
All are sufficient at removing droplet and viral size particles when worn correctly for the duration of the exposure.
Filters are available in three efficiency levels – 95, 99, 100.
Thus, a wide selection is potentially available for use to augment the overall supply of respirators in healthcare settings.
Half-facepiece or half mask (APF = 10)1 and full facepiece (APF = 50) elastomeric respirators have specific cautions, limitations, and restrictions of use that need to be understood when determining whether to use these respirators in a healthcare facility.
Respirators with full facepieces have the same filter considerations but provide greater protection because of better sealing characteristics and less face seal leakage and also provide protection to more of the face and very importantly, the eyes.
During contingency and crisis capacity strategies, when shortages are predicted, but supplies are still available, each elastomeric respirator is issued for the exclusive use of an individual employee.
Elastomeric respirators must be cleaned as often as necessary to remain unsoiled and sanitary.
Viruses and bacteria that cause acute respiratory infections can survive on respirator components for variable periods of time, from hours to weeks.
Consequently, contaminated elastomeric respirators must be handled, cleaned, and disinfected properly to reduce the possibility of the device carrying infectious particles and contributing to disease transmission.2
Each respirator manufacturer identifies the appropriate cleaning procedures, which typically involves 1) using soap and warm water or chemical disinfectants authorized for use with their specific elastomeric facepiece components and 2) discarding the filter cartridge.
For conventional use: Employers must consult with the manufacturer concerning the effectiveness and uncertainties of alternative cleaning and disinfectant solutions and procedures used for reuse of the facepiece, straps, and filter components.
For contingency and crisis use: Because of necessity, elastomeric facepiece components and filter cartridges may be treated differently for their cleaning and disinfection.
Whereas conventional practice is to discard the filter component, contingency practices may necessitate cleaning and disinfecting the filter housing, but care must be taken to not exposed the filter media to any cleaning solutions.
The performance of filter media can be degraded by contact with the disinfectant.
There are several basic steps to clean and disinfect an elastomeric respirator – remove, clean, disinfect, rinse and dry, inspect and repair or replace, and store.
Bessesen et al.
provide useful guidelines for cleaning and disinfecting elastomeric respirators in healthcare environments.10 These methods have been used successfully in several healthcare settings in the United States.
The order and details of each step are important.
If available and appropriate, the respirator facepiece components should be cleaned using OSHA or manufacturer protocols.7 14–15 Filter cartridge components would conventionally be discarded.
However, during periods of surge capacity, a careful wipe of the filter cartridge, avoiding contact with the filter media, and using a common hospital disinfectant wipe has low risk of damaging the filter.
The filter cartridge should never be dipped or submerged in disinfectant or excessively wetted with disinfectant.
Generally, it is recommended that respirators be cleaned and disinfected immediately after doffing (i.e removing).
To avoid contact transmission, precautions should be taken during doffing and use.
Training on appropriate donning and doffing procedures should be provided to all employees expected to wear respirators.
Both CDC and OSHA have videos illustrating proper donning and doffing of the respirator.16 Elastomeric components vary among manufacturers and react differently to cleaning and disinfection solutions and procedures.
The respirator facepiece components such as facepiece, valves, and straps require maintenance including cleaning, disinfection and inspection prior to reuse.
OSHA only requires replacing filters where necessary, for example, when soiled, contaminated, or clogged.
The alternate cleaning and disinfection method, described by Bessesen et al.
for use in healthcare when conventional practices are not practical, has been used successfully.10
The effectiveness of an alternate filter cartridge disinfection solution and procedure may be uncertain:
Some elastomeric respirators have filter cartridges that prevent disinfectant contact with the filter media.
If available, these filter cartridges should be used in the contingency capacity strategies approach.
These filter cartridges provide added assurance that the filter media will not be contacted with the cleaning and disinfectant solutions.
These cartridges may be wiped down repeatedly.
NOTE: P-series filters can generally be re-used until they are soiled, damaged, or difficult to breathe through.
Caution should be used when using the filter for a live virus, and thorough disinfection of the filter cartridge should be completed.
Practices not approved by the manufacturer can increase the risk and uncertainty of re-using damaged or degraded components.
This must be balanced against other available HCP protection options to sustain effective HCP protection and patient care.
Modified procedures used during emergencies should be assessed and documented in the written RPP, including alternate cleaning and disinfection practices.
For disinfection, diluted household bleach solutions, alcohol solutions with at least 70% ethyl alcohol, and EPA-registered household disinfectants should be effective against coronaviruses.
For use of diluted household bleach solutions, follow disinfectant manufacturers instructions for proper disinfectant application, PPE, and ventilation.
CAUTION: The following may degrade or damage the respirator components.
Some EPA-approved disinfectants are also available as ready to use at 2700 ppm for 1 minute; however, these strong solutions could impact the integrity of the respirator components.
Products with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claims external iconare expected to be effective against SARS-CoV-2.
Follow the manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time, etc.).
Disinfectants listed on the EPAs Registered Antimicrobial Products for Use Against Novel Coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, could be used to inactivate the virus.18 Those intended for use with soft surfaces may be preferred.
All respirators used in routine situations must be inspected by properly trained individuals before each use and during cleaning.
This includes a check of respirator function, tightness of connections, and the condition of the various parts, such as the facepiece, head straps, valves, cartridges, and canisters or filters.
Inspect elastomeric parts for pliability and signs of deterioration.
Respirators that fail an inspection or are otherwise found to be defective should be removed from service and discarded, repaired, or adjusted in accordance with the following procedures:
Discard filter cartridges if they become visibly soiled or wet, if they are visibly damaged, or if the respirator becomes notably harder to breathe through.
Otherwise, change out the filters periodically.
Provided the cartridge integrity and filter have not been compromised, current practice shows that conservatively, the filters could be used for at least one year.18
Workers must be educated and trained on how to safely use their elastomeric respirator.
Employers should follow the respirator manufacturers instructions and OSHA guidance to the greatest extent possible; and consider training recommendations described in the Bessesen protocol.
The NIOSH JETFIT study provides excellent training for contingency situations.
To ensure respirator maintenance is conducted properly, employers should establish disinfection and cleaning procedures and train staff to perform the required maintenance including storage, inspection, distribution, repair or replacement, cleaning, disinfection, and disposal.
Employers may identify a central location for disinfection or train individual users to clean and disinfect their respirators.
Initial surface cleaning should be done at point of use before moving to a central location for disinfection.
19, 20, 21
Respirators must be stored in a clean, non-contaminated location in a manner that does not distort the facepiece or straps.
Respirators need to be thoroughly air dried prior to storage.
During periods of crisis surge capacity, several strategies in addition to the contingency strategies may be followed.
If it is impossible for individual HCP to have dedicated elastomeric respirators, the same elastomeric respirator may be used by multiple HCP.
Elastomeric respirators issued to more than one employee should be cleaned, disinfected, and inspected before being worn by different individuals.
One option is to label the respirator, conduct surface cleaning at the point of use, and return to a central location to be disinfected by central staff before reissuing the respirator to a different user.
Machines may be used to expedite the cleaning, sanitizing, rinsing, and drying of large numbers of elastomeric respirators.
In general, the respirators elastomeric components should not be cleaned with solvents (e.g acetone, ethanol) or exposed to temperatures greater than 50°C (122°F).
Post-cleaning inspection by personnel trained in the necessary maintenance tasks should still be conducted to assure respirator functionality has not been degraded.
Extreme care should be taken to limit tumbling, agitation, or exposure to temperatures above those recommended by the manufacturer, as these conditions may result in damage to the respirators.
Ultrasonic cleaners, clothes washing machines, dishwashers, and clothes dryers have been specially adapted and successfully used for cleaning and drying elastomeric respirators.
22
OSHA has issued temporary enforcement guidance about switching from quantitative to qualitative fit testing, and OSHA is waiving the annual fit testing requirements as described above.7 If fit testing is not possible, leakage at the face seal could occur and the protection provided to the wearer may be significantly reduced.
For any tight-fitting respirator, such as FFRs and elastomeric respirators, a successful user seal check must be performed with each donning.
Under serious outbreak conditions in which respirator supplies are severely limited, HCP may not have the opportunity to ever be fit tested on a respirator before needing to use it.
While this is not ideal, in this scenario, HCP should work with their employers to choose the respirator that fits them best, as, even without fit testing, a respirator will provide better protection than using no respirator at all or using a surgical mask.
If possible, the HCP should start with the size used previously for fit testing, but as size can vary by manufacturer and model, a different size may be needed to achieve a good fit.
If fit testing has never been done, the following recommendations are still useful.
Fit testing is necessary to confirm if a respirator does or does not fit.
During a crisis, however, when conventional requirements cannot be implemented, healthcare professionals should be able to determine if they have obtained a reasonable fit if they have had training and they perform a successful user seal check prior to each use of the respirator.
1 An Assigned Protection Factor (APF) is the workplace level of respiratory protection that a respirator is expected to provide to employees when used in conjunction with an effective RPP.
1 OSHA (Standards – 29 CFR).
Occupational Safety and Health Standards.
Available from: https://www.osha.gov/pls/oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_id=12716&amp;p_table=standardsexternal icon
2 WHO 2014.
Infection prevention and control of epidemic-and pandemic prone acute respiratory infections in health care.
Available from: https://www.who.int/csr/bioriskreduction/infection_control/publication/en/external icon
3 CDC 2020.
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19): FAQ about PPE.
Available from: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/respirator-use-faq.html
 4 CDC 2020.
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19): Optimize PPE Supply.
Available from: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/ppe-strategy/index.html
5 3M 2020.
Respiratory Protection for Airborne Exposures to Biohazards.
Available from: https://multimedia.3m.com/mws/media/409903O/respiratory-protection-against-biohazards.pdfpdf iconexternal icon
6 Moldex.
7000 Series Reusable Half Mask Respirator.
Available from: https://www.moldex.com/product/7000-series-half-mask-respirator/external icon
7 OSHA 2020.
Temporary Enforcement Guidance – Healthcare Respiratory Protection Annual Fit-Testing for N95 Filtering Facepieces During the COVID-19 Outbreak.
Available at: https://www.osha.gov/memos/2020-03-14/temporary-enforcement-guidance-healthcare-respiratory-protection-annual-fitexternal icon
8 NIOSH 1996.
NIOSH Guide to the Selection and Use of Particulate Respirators (Certified Under 42 CFR 84).
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, DHHS (NIOSH) Publication 96-101, https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/96-101/default.html
9 Pompei LA, Kraft CS, Brownsword EA 2020.
Training and Fit Testing of Health Care Personnel for Reusable Elastomeric Half-Mask Respirators Compared with Disposable N95 Respirators.
JAMA.
doi:10.1001/jama.2020.4806
10 Bessesen M, Adams JC, Radonovich L, Anderson J 2015.
Disinfection of Reusable Elastomeric Respirators by Health Care Workers: A Feasibility Study and Development of Standard Operating Procedures.
American Journal of Infection Control 43(6):629-634.
11 CDC 2020.
Coronoavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19): Decontamination and Reuse of Filtering Facepiece Respirators.
Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/ppe-strategy/decontamination-reuse-respirators.html
12 Rutala WA, Weber DJ 2019.
Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee.
Guideline for Disinfection and Sterilization in Healthcare Facilities, 2008.
13 Lawrence C, Harnish DA, Sandoval-Powers M, Mills D, Bergman M, Heimbuch BK 2017.
Assessment of half-mask elastomeric respirator and powered air-purifying respirator reprocessing for an influenza pandemic.
Am J Infect Control, 45(12):1324-1330.
14 OSHA 29CFR1910.134.
Available from: https://www.osha.gov/laws-regs/regulations/standardnumber/1910/1910.134external icon
15 OSHA 1910.134 App B-2 Respirator Cleaning Procedures (Mandatory).
Available from: https://www.osha.gov/laws-regs/regulations/standardnumber/1910/1910.134AppB2external icon
16 CDC.
Sequence for Putting On Personal Protective Equipment (PPE).
Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npptl/pdfs/PPE-Sequence-508.pdfpdf icon
17 EPA 2020.
List N: disinfectants for use against SARS-CoV-2.
Available from: https://www.epa.gov/pesticide-registration/list-n-disinfectants-use-against-sars-cov-2external icon
18 Personal communications with University of Maryland School of Medicine, March 18, 2020.
19 University of Nebraska Medical Center 2012.
Half Mask Respirator II: Gross Decon, Reassembly, and Storage.
Available at: https://app1.unmc.edu/nursing/heroes/mpv.cfm?updateindex=73&amp;src=ytexternal icon
20 University of Nebraska Medical Center 2011 Half Mask Respirator III: Light Decon and Storage.
Available at: https://app1.unmc.edu/nursing/heroes/mpv.cfm?updateindex=72&amp;src=ytexternal icon
21 CDC 2020.
Elastomeric Respirators for U.S. Healthcare Delivery.
Available from: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8wd5Bx2fVDI
22 ATSM International F3387-19, Standard for Respiratory Protection.
23 OSHA 2009.
Respiratory Safety (video).
Available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tzpz5fko-fg
24 OSHA 2009.
Seguridad de Máscaras de Respiración.
Available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jgRKuRcTGeE
25 University of Nebraska Medical Center 2011.
Half Mask Respirator I: Donning, Doffing and Fit Check.
Available at: https://app1.unmc.edu/nursing/heroes/mpv.cfm?updateindex=71&amp;src=ytexternal iconexternal icon
During a large-scale public health emergency involving a respiratory disease like COVID-19, federal, state, or local stockpiled ventilators should be deployed in a way that optimizes the effectiveness, efficiency, and equity of this scarce resource.
Decisions on the allocation of stockpiled ventilators to facilities should be based on multiple factors, including:1
State and local planners can use the strategies in this guide to assist them when allocating ventilators from public health stockpiles to hospitals and other facilities during a pandemic.
This document is intended to address frequently asked questions about personal protective equipment (PPE).
Nonsterile, disposable patient isolation gowns, which are used for routine patient care in healthcare settings, are appropriate for use by patients with suspected or confirmed COVID-19.
Unlike patient care in the controlled environment of a healthcare facility, care and transport by EMS present unique challenges because of the nature of the setting.
Coveralls are an acceptable alternative to gowns when caring for and transporting suspect COVID-19 patients.
While no clinical studies have been done to compare gowns and coveralls, both have been used effectively by healthcare workers in clinical settings during patient care.
CDCs Considerations for Selecting Protective Clothing used in Healthcare for Protection against Microorganisms in Blood and Body Fluids guidance provides a comparison between gowns and coveralls, including test methods and performance requirements.
Coveralls typically provide 360-degree protection because they are designed to cover the whole body, including the back and lower legs, and sometimes the head and feet as well.
This added coverage may be necessary for some work tasks involved in medical transport.
However, coveralls may lead to increased heat stress compared to gowns due to the total area covered by the fabric.
Training on how to properly remove (doff) a coverall is important to prevent self-contamination.
Comparatively, gowns are easier to put on and, in particular, to take off.
Nonsterile disposable patient examination gloves, which are used for routine patient care in healthcare settings, are appropriate for the care of patients with suspected or confirmed COVID-19.
CDC Guidance does not recommend double gloves when providing care to suspected or confirmed 2019-COVID patients.
According to CDC Guidance, extended length gloves are not necessary when providing care to suspected or confirmed COVID-19 patients.
Extended length gloves can be used, but CDC is not specifically recommending them at this time.
Most often, spread of respiratory viruses from person-to-person happens among close contacts (within 6 feet).
Recent studies indicate that people who are infected but do not have symptoms likely also play a role in the spread of COVID-19.
CDC recommends everyday preventive actions to prevent the spread of respiratory viruses, such as avoiding people who are sick, avoiding touching your eyes or nose, and covering your cough or sneeze with a tissue.
People who are sick should stay home and not go into crowded public places or visit people in hospitals.
Workers who are sick should follow CDC guidelines and stay home when they are sick.
A respirator is a personal protective device that is worn on the face or head and covers at least the nose and mouth.
A respirator is used to reduce the wearers risk of inhaling hazardous airborne particles (including infectious agents), gases or vapors.
Respirators, including those intended for use in healthcare settings, are certified by the CDC/NIOSH.
An N95 FFR is a type of respirator which removes particles from the air that are breathed through it.
These respirators filter out at least 95% of very small (0.3 micron) particles.
N95 FFRs are capable of filtering out all types of particles, including bacteria and viruses.
The requirements for surgical N95 respirators that make them resistant to high velocity streams of body fluids and help protect the sterile field can result in a design that has a higher breathing resistance (makes it more difficult to breath) than a typical N95 respirator.
Also, surgical N95 respirators are designed without exhalation valves which are sometimes perceived as warmer inside the mask than typical N95 respirators.
If you are receiving complaints, you may consider having employees who are not doing surgery, not working in a sterile field, or not potentially exposed to high velocity streams of body fluids wear a standard N95 with an exhalation valve.
An N95 respirator with an exhalation valve does provide the same level of protection to the wearer as one that does not have a valve.
The presence of an exhalation valve reduces exhalation resistance, which makes it easier to breathe or exhale.
Some users feel that a respirator with an exhalation valve keeps the face cooler and reduces moisture build up inside the facepiece.
However, respirators with exhalation valves should not be used in situations where a sterile field must be maintained (e.g during an invasive procedure in an operating or procedure room) because the exhalation valve may allow unfiltered exhaled air to escape into the sterile field.
If you only have a respirator with an exhalation valve available, cover the exhalation valve with a facemask (surgical or procedure mask) that does not interfere with the respirator fit.​
Respirators with exhalation valves protect the wearer from SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, but may not prevent the virus spreading from the wearer to others (that is, they may not be effective for source control).
Until data are available to describe how effective respirators with exhalation valves are in preventing the spread of SARS-CoV-2 from the wearer to others:
The NIOSH approval number and approval label are key to identifying NIOSH-approved respirators.
The  NIOSH approval label can be found on or within the packaging of the respirator or sometimes on the respirator itself.
The required labeling of NIOSH-Approved N95 filtering facepiece respiratorspdf icon  includes the NIOSH name, the approval number, filter designations, lot number, and model number to be printed on the respirator.
You can verify that your respirator approvals are valid by checking the NIOSH Certified Equipment List (CEL).
When NIOSH becomes aware of counterfeit respirators or those misrepresenting NIOSH approval on the market, these respirators are posted on the Counterfeit Respirators / Misrepresentation of NIOSH-Approval webpage to alert users, purchasers, and manufacturers.
NIOSH does not require approved N95 filtering facepiece respirators (FFRs) be marked with an expiration date.
If an FFR does not have an assigned expiration date, you should refer to the user instructions or seek guidance from the specific manufacturer on whether time and storage conditions (such as temperature or humidity) are expected to have an effect on the respirators performance and if the respirators are nearing the end of their shelf life.
In times of increased demand and decreased supply, consideration can be made to use N95 respirators past their intended shelf life.
However, the potential exists that the respirator will not perform to the requirements for which it was certified.
Over time, components such as the strap and nose bridge may degrade, which can affect the quality of the fit and seal.
Prior to use of N95 respirators, the HCP should inspect the respirator and perform a seal check.
Additionally, expired respirators may potentially no longer meet the certification requirements set by NIOSH.
For further guidance, visit Release of Stockpiled N95 Filtering Facepiece Respirators Beyond the Manufacturer-Designated Shelf Life: Considerations for the COVID-19 Response.
Monitoring PPE supply inventory and maintaining control over PPE supplies may help prevent unintentional product losses that may occur due to theft, damage, or accidental loss.
Inventory systems should be employed to track daily usage and identify areas of higher than expected use.
This information can be used to implement additional conservation strategies tailored to specific patient care areas such as hospital units or outpatient facilities.
Inventory tracking within a health system may also assist in confirming PPE deliveries and optimizing distribution of PPE supplies to specific facilities.
1ASTM D6319-Standard Specification for Nitrile Examination Gloves for Medical Applications
2ASTM D3578 Standard Specification for Rubber Examination Gloves
3ASTM D5250 Standard Specification for Poly(vinyl chloride) Gloves for Medical Application
4ASTMD 6977 Standard Specification for Polychloroprene Examination Gloves for Medical Application
The interim guidance was updated on May 29, 2020.
Updates include:
The interim guidance was updated on May 23, 2020 to clarify the definition of exposure for HCP not wearing eye protection.
This interim guidance was updated on May 19, 2020.
Updates include:
This interim guidance is intended to assist with assessment of risk and application of work restrictions for asymptomatic healthcare personnel (HCP) with potential exposure to patients, visitors, or other HCP with confirmed COVID-19.
Separate guidance is available for travel- and community-related exposures.
The community-related exposure guidance can be used to inform risk assessment for patients and visitors exposed to SARS-CoV-2 in a healthcare setting.
CDC has also released guidance about return to work criteria for HCP with COVID-19 and strategies for mitigating HCP staffing shortages.
Because of their often extensive and close contact with vulnerable individuals in healthcare settings, a conservative approach to HCP monitoring and applying work restrictions is recommended to prevent transmission from potentially contagious HCP to patients, other HCP, and visitors.
Occupational health programs should have a low threshold for evaluating symptoms and testing HCP.
The feasibility and utility of performing contact tracing of exposed HCP and application of work restrictions depends upon the degree of community transmission of SARS-CoV-2 and the resources available for contact tracing.
For areas with:
This guidance is based on currently available data about COVID-19.
Recommendations regarding which HCP are restricted from work might not anticipate every potential scenario and will change if indicated by new information.
Occupational health programs should use clinical judgement as well as the principles outlined in this guidance to assign risk and determine the need for work restrictions.
This approach might be refined and updated, including defining the role of testing exposed HCP as more information becomes available and as response needs change in the United States.
CDCs recommendations for the assessment of and response to HCP exposures to SARS-CoV-2-infected patients have evolved as the incidence of COVID-19 in the United States has changed.
Before recognized widespread transmission in the United States, CDC recommended an aggressive approach to identifying exposed HCP and included recommendations for restricting some HCP from work who had higher risk exposures.
As community spread of COVID-19 became apparent in many areas and as transmission from asymptomatic individuals was recognized, this approach became impractical and diverted resources away from other critical infection prevention and control functions.
In response, CDC advised facilities to consider forgoing formal contact tracing and work restrictions for HCP with exposures in favor of universally applied symptom screening and source control strategies.
This updated guidance describes a process for resumption of contact tracing and application of work restrictions that can be considered in areas where spread in the community has decreased and when capacity exists to perform these activities without compromising other critical infection prevention and control functions.
It has been simplified to focus on exposures that are believed to result in higher risk for HCP (e.g prolonged exposure to patients with COVID-19 when HCPs eyes, nose, or mouth are not covered).
Other exposures not included as higher risk, including having body contact with the patient (e.g rolling the patient) without gown or gloves, may impart some risk for transmission, particularly if hand hygiene is not performed and HCP then touch their eyes, nose, or mouth.
The specific factors associated with these exposures should be evaluated on a case by case basis; interventions, including restriction from work, can be applied if the risk for transmission is deemed substantial.
The definition of prolonged was extended to refer to a time period of 15 or more minutes, which aligns with the time period used in the guidance for community exposures and contact tracingpdf icon.
However, any duration should be considered prolonged if the exposure occurs during performance of an aerosol-generating procedure.1
Higher-risk exposures generally involve exposure of HCPs eyes, nose, or mouth to material potentially containing SARS-CoV-2, particularly if these HCP were present in the room for an aerosol-generating procedure.
This guidance applies to HCP with potential exposure in a healthcare setting to patients, visitors, or other HCP with confirmed COVID-19.
Exposures can also occur from a suspected case of COVID-19 or from a person under investigation (PUI) when testing has not yet occurred or if results are pending.
Work restrictions described in this guidance might be applied to HCP exposed to a PUI if test results for the PUI are not expected to return within 48 to 72 hours.
Therefore, a record of HCP exposed to PUIs should be maintained.
If test results will be delayed more than 72 hours or the patient is positive for COVID-19, then the work restrictions described in this document should be applied.
Healthcare Personnel (HCP): HCP include, but are not limited to, emergency medical service personnel, nurses, nursing assistants, physicians, technicians, therapists, phlebotomists, pharmacists, students and trainees, contractual staff not employed by the healthcare facility, and persons not directly involved in patient care, but who could be exposed to infectious agents that can be transmitted in the healthcare setting (e.g clerical, dietary, environmental services, laundry, security, engineering and facilities management, administrative, billing, volunteer personnel).
For this guidance, HCP does not include clinical laboratory personnel.
Public Health Recommendations after Travel-Associated COVID-19 Exposure
Public Health Recommendations for Community-Related Exposure
Criteria for Return to Work for Healthcare Personnel with Confirmed or Suspected COVID-19 (Interim Guidance)
Strategies to Mitigate Healthcare Personnel Staffing Shortages
Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Suspected or Confirmed Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) in a Healthcare Setting.
Audience: Managers and their staff engaged in public health clinic settings and field outreach activities in state and local health departments.
Purpose: To provide guidance for the management of public health workers engaged in public health activities that require face-to-face interaction with clients in clinic and field settings.
These activities would include prevention and control programs for TB, STDs, HIV, and other infectious disease activities that would require outbreak or contact investigation, home visits, or partner services, and non-infectious disease-specific programs, e.g syringe services programs, or occupational health activities.
The Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) global pandemic has forced public health to reassess its approach to providing care while keeping staff and patients safe.
Mitigation strategies, such as social distancing and sheltering in place, have impacted clinical care and field services across the nation.
As a result, many jurisdictions have limited face-to-face interactions to only the most essential.
It is important to protect healthcare and public health workers from COVID-19 while maintaining their ability to deliver critical public health services.
State, local, tribal, and territorial public health programs need flexibility to reassign tasks and shift priorities to meet these competing needs.
This document provides guidance for protecting public health workers engaged in public health activities that require face-to-face interaction with clients in clinic and field settings.
The guidance has the following objectives:
Activities that should receive highest priority will vary with the level of community COVID-19 transmission, characteristics of the priority populations to be served, local capacity to implement effective prevention and control activities, and availability of effective interventions.
Points to consider include:
Consistent with CDCs guidance for implementation of prevention strategies for communities with local COVID-19 transmission (see community mitigation strategypdf icon), this adapted table lays out two sets of strategies that public health departments should use based on the current level of COVID-19 community transmission.
Substantial: Large scale community transmission, healthcare staffing significantly impacted, multiple cases within communal settings like healthcare facilities, schools, mass gatherings etc.
*Assuming there is adequate availability of quality diagnostic information.
In the absence of such information, other sources of judgement should be sought, such as local public health officials, hospital guidance, or local health care providers.
Workers risk of occupational exposure may vary based on the nature of their work.
Public health programs should assess potential risk for exposure to the virus that causes COVID-19, especially for those staff whose job functions require working with clients in close proximity and in locations where there is known community transmission.
While not all public health staff fall into the category of healthcare personnel (HCP), conducting medical exams or specimen collection procedures where risk of exposure is high, many public health activities for disease prevention and intervention involve face-to-face interactions with patients, partners, and organizations, putting public health staff at risk for acquiring COVID-19.
Per CDC guidance (see https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/clinical-criteria.html), close contact is defined as: a) being within approximately 6 feet (2 meters) of a person with COVID-19 for a prolonged period of time; close contact can occur while caring for, living with, visiting, or sharing a healthcare waiting area or room with a person with COVID-19, – or – b) having direct contact with infectious secretions of a person with COVID-19 such as being coughed on.
Public health staff should wear appropriate PPE for the job function that they are performing, in accordance with state and local guidance.
CDC has issued guidance to provide a framework for the assessment and management of potential exposures to the virus that causes COVID-19 and implementation of safeguards based on a persons risk level and clinical presentation: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/guidance-risk-assesment-hcp.html.
This guidance is updated routinely.
Please see the CDC website for additional information about levels of risk.
Public health departments should protect staff as they perform their work functions, and implement workplace strategies (see https://www.osha.gov/Publications/OSHA3990.pdfpdf iconexternal icon) that mitigate transmission of the virus that causes COVID-19.
Protective measures for public health staff may vary by state and local health jurisdiction and should be guided by both state and local community transmission, the type of work that public health staff perform and the associated transmission risk, and state and local resources.
Additional guidance for health departments can be found at https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/php/index.html.
In public health clinical settings, it is important to prepare to safely triage and manage patients with respiratory illness, including COVID-19.
All healthcare facilities should be aware of any updates to local and state public health recommendations.
For healthcare settings, key guidance includes:
Program managers may need to provide additional precautions while collecting specimens.
Screening and symptom monitoring of staff who continue to work should also be implemented.
Published infection prevention and control guidance for preparing for and managing patients with COVID-19 in healthcare settings is available at https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/infection-control-recommendations.html, with specific guidance for the clinic setting available at https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/clinic-preparedness.html, and includes:
Some facilities such as clinics, grocery stores, and banks in areas with high community transmission have found success with:
While existing recommendations focus primarily on healthcare settings, some public health programs have field-based public health staff that require protection.
Staff who have close contact with patients should be equipped and trained on the use of appropriate respiratory protection and other PPE, as indicated by the current level of community transmission, and job function.
For those having face-to-face interaction with patients for a disease-specific program, more comprehensive PPE may be indicated, depending upon the context, prevalence of COVID-19 in the community, degree of contact with the client, and healthcare activity pursued.
For those working with persons with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 and their asymptomatic close contacts at their home or non-home residential settings, CDC has specific guidance: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/php/guidance-evaluating-pui.html.
For contact tracing, public health programs should consider implementing technology assisted models for client interaction such as those employed increasingly by tuberculosis programs (see https://www.cdc.gov/nchhstp/highimpactprevention/promising-hip-intervention.html), used for monitoring of returning travelers for Ebola, and implemented by sexually transmitted infection programs for partner services.
Technology assisted models include those that are synchronous (such as video chat via Skype, Facetime, Webex, or Zoom, text message, and other social media) and asynchronous (such as recorded video of directly observed therapy (DOT)).
While the use of social media and smart phones is ubiquitous, not all patients have access to this technology.
Patients in need of infectious disease testing and treatment services may also be persons experiencing homelessness, drug use, and mental health diagnoses.
To facilitate disease prevention and control, public health programs must meet these patients where they are, providing field-based support with face-to-face interactions and in-person assistance with navigation of services.
In these instances, public health staff should use appropriate PPE to prevent COVID-19 transmission.
(See guidance on homelessness and COVID-19 at COVID-19 and unsheltered homelessness.)
This may also include provision of face masks for patients, frequent adequate handwashing, and regular disinfection of commonly touched surfaces.
In situations where appropriate respiratory protection and other PPE are not available or community level transmission prevents face-to-face interactions, staff safety must be considered, and alternative means of contacting patients as mentioned above should be pursued.
Public health programs should collaborate with environmental health hospital acquired infections and occupational health programs in order to develop contingency plans to address what to do if a client comes in sick or tests positive, and what to do if an employee comes in sick or tests positive.
The possibility of pre-symptomatic or asymptomatic transmission increases the challenges of managing public health activities, underscoring the importance of prioritizing activities, use of respiratory protection and other PPE, social distancing to reduce exposure to and transmission of COVID-19, and limiting in-person care.
Therefore, workers required to come to an office should wear face masks or cloth face coverings to prevent transmission.
Public health programs are encouraged to explore flexible workplace policies including telecommuting and increased sick leave.
Programs should also explore telemedicine and other ways to use new technologies that may facilitate syndromic evaluation and treatment of patients.
Staff should be reminded to not report to work when they are ill. Be aware of recommended work restrictions and monitoring based on staff exposure to patients with COVID-19.
Employees should be advised to check for any signs or symptoms of illness before reporting to work and to notify their supervisor if they become ill.
Consider implementing a process of screening staff for fever or respiratory symptoms before entering the facility.
Proactively plan for absenteeism with contingency planning that could include altering clinic hours, cross-training staff, or hiring temporary or additional employees.
Programs are encouraged to implement contingency plans to address the following: what to do if a large proportion of the workforce gets sick, what to do if staff need to provide childcare at home due to daycare or school closing, and interruptions in PPE supply.
These recommendations are aimed at assisting state, territorial, local, and tribal health departments to balance the competing demands of their routine infectious disease caseload throughout the COVID-19 response.
CDC programs remain available to consult on disease-specific guidance to aid in prioritization of public health work activities.
Our thanks go out to the public health staff on the front lines who are working to balance these priorities and who rise daily to the challenge of the COVID-19 response.
Services for clients that could be continued or delayed depending on local circumstances:
The source of the content in this document is CDCs National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STDs, and TB Prevention.
Summary of Recent Changes as of August 10, 2020 to more closely align guidance with Decision Memo:
CDC guidance for SARS-CoV-2 infection may be adapted by state and local health departments to respond to rapidly changing local circumstances.
Who this is for: Occupational health programs and public health officials making decisions about return to work for healthcare personnel (HCP) with confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection, or who have suspected SARS-CoV-2 infection (e.g developed symptoms of COVID-19) but were never tested for SARS-CoV-2.
HCP with symptoms of COVID-19 should be prioritized for viral testing with approved nucleic acid or antigen detection assays.
When a clinician decides that testing a person for SARS-CoV-2 is indicated, negative results from at least one FDA Emergency Use Authorized COVID-19 molecular viral assay for detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA indicates that the person most likely does not have an active SARS-CoV-2 infection at the time the sample was collected.
A second test for SARS-CoV-2 RNA may be performed at the discretion of the evaluating healthcare provider, particularly when a higher level of clinical suspicion for SARS-CoV-2 infection exists.
For HCP who were suspected of having COVID-19 and had it ruled out, either with at least one negative test or a clinical decision that COVID-19 is not suspected and testing is not indicated, then return to work decisions should be based on their other suspected or confirmed diagnoses.
Decisions about return to work for HCP with SARS-CoV-2 infection should be made in the context of local circumstances.
In general, a symptom-based strategy should be used as described below.
The time period used depends on the HCPs severity of illness and if they are severely immunocompromised.1
A test-based strategy is no longer recommended (except as noted below) because, in the majority of cases, it results in excluding from work HCP who continue to shed detectable SARS-CoV-2 RNA but are no longer infectious.
For guidance about assessment of risk and application of work restrictions for asymptomatic HCP with potential exposure to patients, visitors, or other HCP with confirmed COVID-19, refer to the Interim U.S.
Guidance for Risk Assessment and Work Restrictions for Healthcare Personnel with Potential Exposure to COVID-19.
Symptom-based strategy for determining when HCP can return to work.
HCP with mild to moderate illness who are not severely immunocompromised:
Note:  HCP who are not severely immunocompromised and were asymptomatic throughout their infection may return to work when at least 10 days have passed since the date of their first positive viral diagnostic test.
HCP with severe to critical illness or who are severely immunocompromised1:
Note:  HCP who are severely immunocompromised but who were asymptomatic throughout their infection may return to work when at least 10 days and up to 20 days have passed since the date of their first positive viral diagnostic test.
As described in the Decision Memo, an estimated 95% of severely or critically ill patients, including some with severe immunocompromise, no longer had replication-competent virus 15 days after onset of symptoms; no patient had replication-competent virus more than 20 days after onset of symptoms.
The exact criteria that determine which HCP will shed replication-competent virus for longer periods are not known.
Disease severity factors and the presence of immunocompromising conditions should be considered in determining the appropriate duration for specific HCP.
For example, HCP with characteristics of severe illness may be most appropriately managed with at least 15 days before return to work.
Test-Based Strategy for Determining when HCP Can Return to Work.
In some instances, a test-based strategy could be considered to allow HCP to return to work earlier than if the symptom-based strategy were used.
However, as described in the Decision Memo, many individuals will have prolonged viral shedding, limiting the utility of this approach.
A test-based strategy could also be considered for some HCP (e.g those who are severely immunocompromised1) in consultation with local infectious diseases experts if concerns exist for the HCP being infectious for more than 20 days.
The criteria for the test-based strategy are:
After returning to work, HCP should:
Maintaining appropriate staffing in healthcare facilities is essential to providing a safe work environment for HCP and safe patient care.
As the COVID-19 pandemic progresses, staffing shortages will likely occur due to HCP exposures, illness, or need to care for family members at home.
Healthcare facilities must be prepared for potential staffing shortages and have plans and processes in place to mitigate them, including considerations for permitting HCP to return to work without meeting all return to work criteria above.
Refer to the Strategies to Mitigate Healthcare Personnel Staffing Shortages document for information.
Cloth face covering: Textile (cloth) covers are intended to keep the person wearing one from spreading respiratory secretions when talking, sneezing, or coughing.
They are not PPE, and it is uncertain whether cloth face coverings protect the wearer.
CDC has guidance available on design, use, and maintenance of cloth face coverings.
Facemask: Facemasks are PPE and are often referred to as surgical masks or procedure masks.
Use facemasks according to product labeling and local, state, and federal requirements.
FDA-cleared surgical masks are designed to protect against splashes and sprays and are prioritized for use when such exposures are anticipated, including surgical procedures.
Facemasks that are not regulated by FDA, such as some procedure masks, which are typically used for isolation purposes, may not provide protection against splashes and sprays.
Respirator: A respirator is a personal protective device that is worn on the face, covers at least the nose and mouth, and is used to reduce the wearers risk of inhaling hazardous airborne particles (including dust particles and infectious agents), gases, or vapors.
Respirators are certified by the CDC/NIOSH, including those intended for use in healthcare.
SARS-CoV-2 Illness Severity Criteria (adapted from the NIH COVID-19 Treatment Guidelinesexternal icon):
Note:  The studies used to inform this guidance did not clearly define severe or critical illness.
This guidance has taken a conservative approach to define these categories.
Although not developed to inform decisions about when HCP with SARS-CoV-2 infection may return to work, the definitions in the National Institutes of Health (NIH) COVID-19 Treatment Guidelinesexternal icon are one option for defining severity of illness categories.
The highest level of illness severity experienced by the HCP at any point in their clinical course should be used when determining when they may return to work.
Mild Illness: Individuals who have any of the various signs and symptoms of COVID 19 (e.g fever, cough, sore throat, malaise, headache, muscle pain) without shortness of breath, dyspnea, or abnormal chest imaging.
Moderate Illness: Individuals who have evidence of lower respiratory disease by clinical assessment or imaging and a saturation of oxygen (SpO2) ≥94% on room air at sea level.
Severe Illness: Individuals who have respiratory frequency &gt;30 breaths per minute, SpO2 &lt;94% on room air at sea level (or, for patients with chronic hypoxemia, a decrease from baseline of &gt;3%), ratio of arterial partial pressure of oxygen to fraction of inspired oxygen (PaO2/FiO2) &lt;300 mmHg, or lung infiltrates &gt;50%.
Critical Illness: Individuals who have respiratory failure, septic shock, and/or multiple organ dysfunction.
1The studies used to inform this guidance did not clearly define severely immunocompromised.
For the purposes of this guidance, CDC used the following definition that was created to more generally address HCP occupational exposures.
This guidance applies to all medical first responders, including fire services, emergency medical services, and emergency management officials, who anticipate close contact with persons with suspected or confirmed Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection in the course of their work.
Below are changes to the guidance as of July 15, 2020:
This interim guidance has been updated based on currently available information about COVID-19 and the current situation in the United States.
EMS practices should be based on the most up-to-date clinical recommendations and information from appropriate public health authorities and EMS medical direction about SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Most recommendations in this updated guidance are not new (except as noted in the summary of changes above); they have been reorganized into the following sections:
EMS play a vital role in responding to requests for assistance, triaging patients, and providing emergency medical treatment and transport for ill or injured persons.
However, unlike patient care in the controlled environment of a healthcare facility, care and transports by EMS present unique challenges because of the nature of the setting, enclosed space during transport, frequent need for rapid medical decision-making, interventions with limited information, and a varying range of patient acuity and jurisdictional healthcare resources.
When preparing for and responding to patients with suspected or confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection, close coordination and effective communications are important among 911 Public Safety Answering Points/Emergence Communication Centers (PSAP/ECCs)— commonly known as 911 call centers, the EMS system, healthcare facilities, and the public health system.
Each PSAP/ECC and EMS system should seek the involvement of an EMS medical director to provide appropriate medical oversight.
When SARS-CoV-2 infection is suspected in a patient needing emergency transport, prehospital care providers and healthcare facilities should be notified in advance that they may be caring for, transporting, or receiving a patient who might have SARS-CoV-2 infection.
This interim guidance applies to all EMS personnel (i.e prehospital EMS and medical first responders involved in 911 responses or interfacility transfers) across multiple EMS models including, but not limited to, free standing, third-service, fire-based, hospital-based, and related EMS providers.
Note that fire services are also included as they respond to emergency medical calls and may do so with or without an ambulance.
CDC recommends using additional infection prevention and control practices during the COVID-19 pandemic, along with standard practices recommended as a part of routine healthcare delivery to all patients.
These practices are intended to apply to all patients, not just those with suspected or confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection (See Section 2 for additional practices that should be used when caring for patients with suspected or confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection).
Municipalities and local EMS authorities should coordinate with state and local public health, PSAP/ECCs, and other emergency call centers to address the need for modified caller queries about SARS-CoV-2 infection, outlined below.
These modified caller queries should be developed in collaboration with an EMS medical director and informed by local, state, territorial, tribal and federal public health authorities, including the city or county health department(s), state health department(s), and CDC.
911 Public Safety Answering Points/Emergency Communication Centers (PSAP/ECCs) should question callers and determine whether the call concerns a person who might have SARS-CoV-2 infection (e.g ask about signs and symptoms of COVID-19 or recent close contact with someone with SARS-CoV-2 infection).
The query process should never supersede the provision of pre-arrival instructions to the caller when immediate lifesaving interventions (e.g CPR or the Heimlich maneuver) are indicated.
Information about a patient who might have SARS-CoV-2 infection should be communicated immediately to EMS personnel before arrival on scene in order to limit the number of EMS personnel exposed to the patient and to allow use of appropriate PPE.
As part of pre-arrival instructions, PSAP/ECCs should encourage the universal use of cloth face coverings for all persons who are safely able to wear them at the scene prior to EMS arrival.
PSAP/ECCs should utilize medical dispatch protocols that are approved by their EMS medical director in consultation with the local or state public health department.
These protocols should be updated, as needed, to accommodate changes in EMS availability, and/or the redirection of low acuity calls to alternate disposition (e.g nurse triage line, telemedicine triage line).
PSAP/ECCs and EMS units that respond to calls for ill travelers at US international airports or other ports of entry to the United States (maritime ports or border crossings) should be in contact with the CDC quarantine station of jurisdiction for the port of entry (see: CDC Quarantine Station Contact List) for planning guidance.
They should notify the quarantine station when responding to that location if a communicable disease is suspected in a traveler.
CDC has provided job aids for this purpose to EMS units operating routinely at US ports of entry.
The PSAP/ECCs or EMS unit can also call CDCs Emergency Operations Center at (770) 488-7100 to be connected with the appropriate CDC quarantine station.
The responsibilities described in this section are for the care and transport of all patients, and not only for the care and transport of patients with suspected or confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection.
The Ryan White HIV/AIDS Treatment Extension Act of 2009 addresses notification procedures and requirements for medical facilities and state public health officers and their designated officers regarding exposure of emergency response employees (EREs), which includes EMS and other first responders, to potentially life-threatening infectious diseases.
In March 2020, CDC/NIOSH updated the list of potentially life-threatening infectious diseases to which EREs might be exposed that are covered by the Act to include the addition of COVID-19, the disease caused by the virus SARS-CoV-2.
A medical facility must respond to appropriate requests by making determinations about whether EREs have been exposed to infectious diseases included on the list.
See https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/2020-119/pdfs/2020-119.pdf?id=10.26616/NIOSHPUB2020119pdf icon for more information.
In addition, employers are required to:
Screen all EMS Personnel for Signs or Symptoms of SARS-CoV-2 Infection at the Start of Each Shift
Although screening for symptoms will not identify asymptomatic or pre-symptomatic individuals with SARS-CoV-2 infection, symptom screening remains an important strategy to identify those who could have COVID-19 and require prompt assessment and response.
Assess All Patients for SARS-CoV-2 Infection
Source control refers to use of cloth face coverings or facemasks to cover a persons mouth and nose to prevent the release of respiratory secretions when they are talking, sneezing, or coughing.
Because of the potential for asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic transmission, source control measures are recommended for everyone, even if they do not have symptoms of COVID-19.
Healthcare delivery requires close physical contact between patients and EMS personnel.
However, when possible, physical distancing (maintaining at least 6 feet between people) is an important strategy to prevent SARS-CoV-2 transmission.
For EMS personnel, the potential for exposure to SARS-CoV-2 is not limited to direct patient care interactions.
Transmission can also occur through unprotected exposures to asymptomatic or pre-symptomatic co-workers in breakrooms, co-workers or visitors in other common areas, or other exposures in the community.
Examples of how physical distancing can be implemented for EMS personnel include:
Implement Universal Use of Personal Protective Equipment
Create a Process to Address to SARS-CoV-2 Exposures Among EMS Personnel and Others
EMS should have a process for notifying the health department about suspected or confirmed cases of SARS-CoV-2 infection, and should establish a plan, in consultation with local public health authorities, for how exposures in EMS personnel will be investigated and managed and how contact tracing will be performed.
The plan should address the following:
Contact tracing should be carried out in a way that protects the confidentiality of affected individuals and is consistent with applicable laws and regulations.
EMS personnel and patients who were transported to a healthcare facility should be prioritized for notification.
These groups, if infected, have the potential to expose many individuals at higher risk for severe disease, or in the situation of admitted patients, are at higher risk for severe illness themselves.
Information about risk assessment and work restrictions for healthcare personnel (HCP) including EMS personnel exposed to SARS-CoV-2 is available in the Interim U.S.
Guidance for Risk Assessment and Work Restrictions for Healthcare Personnel with Potential Exposure to Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Information about when HCP including EMS personnel with suspected or confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection may return to work is available in the Interim Guidance on Criteria for Return to Work for Healthcare Personnel with Confirmed or Suspected COVID-19.
The EMS system must be prepared for potential staffing shortages and have plans and processes in place to mitigate these, including providing resources to assist EMS personnel with anxiety and stress.
Strategies to mitigate staffing shortages are available.
EMS personnel who will directly care for a patient with suspected or confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection or who will be in the compartment with the patient should adhere to Standard Precautions and use a NIOSH-approved N95 or equivalent or higher-level respirator (or facemask if a respirator is not available), gown, gloves, and eye protection.
When available, respirators (instead of facemasks) are preferred; they should be prioritized for situations where respiratory protection is most important, including the care of patients with pathogens requiring Airborne Precautions (e.g tuberculosis, measles, varicella).
Any reusable PPE must be properly cleaned, decontaminated, and maintained after and between uses.
Facilities should have policies and procedures describing a recommended sequence for safely donning and doffing PPE.
The PPE recommended when caring for a patient with suspected or confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection includes the following:
EMS systems should work with their health department, healthcare coalitionexternal icon, or emergency management agency to address shortages of PPE.
EMS Transport of a Patient with Suspected or Confirmed SARS-CoV-2 Infection to a Healthcare Facility (including interfacility transport)
If a patient with suspected or confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection requires transport to a healthcare facility for further evaluation and management (subject to EMS medical direction), the following actions should occur during transport:
Cleaning EMS Transport Vehicles after Transporting a Patient with Suspected or Confirmed SARS-CoV-2 Infection
The following are general guidelines for cleaning or maintaining EMS transport vehicles and equipment after transport:
The EMS Infectious Disease Playbook, published by the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Responses Technical Resources, Assistance Center, Information Exchange (TRACIE) is a resource available to planners at https://www.ems.gov/pdf/ASPR-EMS-Infectious-Disease-Playbook-June-2017.pdfpdf iconexternal icon
Filtering Facepiece Respirators (FFR) including N95 Respirators
Source Control: Use of cloth face coverings or facemasks to cover a persons mouth and nose to prevent spread of respiratory secretions when they are talking, sneezing, or coughing.
Facemasks and cloth face coverings should not be placed on children under age 2, anyone who has trouble breathing, or anyone who is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Cloth face covering: Textile (cloth) covers that are intended for source control.
They are not personal protective equipment (PPE) and it is uncertain whether cloth face coverings protect the wearer.
Guidance on design, use, and maintenance of cloth face coverings is available.
Facemask: Facemasks are PPE and are often referred to as surgical masks or procedure masks.
Use facemasks according to product labeling and local, state, and federal requirements.
FDA-cleared surgical masks are designed to protect against splashes and sprays and are prioritized for use when such exposures are anticipated, including surgical procedures.
Facemasks that are not regulated by FDA, such as some procedure masks, which are typically used for isolation purposes, may not provide protection against splashes and sprays.
Respirator: A respirator is a personal protective device that is worn on the face, covers at least the nose and mouth, and is used to reduce the wearers risk of inhaling hazardous airborne particles (including dust particles and infectious agents), gases, or vapors.
Respirators are certified by the CDC/NIOSH, including those intended for use in healthcare.
Refer to the Appendix for a summary of different types of respirators.
Substantial community transmission: Large scale community transmission, including communal settings (e.g schools, workplaces)
Minimal to moderate community transmission: Sustained transmission with high likelihood or confirmed exposure within communal settings and potential for rapid increase in cases
No to minimal community transmission: Evidence of isolated cases or limited community transmission, case investigations underway; no evidence of exposure in large communal setting
Healthcare Personnel Preparedness Checklist for COVID-19 pdf icon1 page

What Healthcare Providers Should Know pdf iconPDF – 1 page
Front-line healthcare personnel in the United States should be prepared to evaluate patients for coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
The following checklist highlights key steps for healthcare personnel in preparation for transport and arrival of patients with confirmed or possible COVID-19.
□ Stay up to date on the latest information about signs and symptoms, viral testing, and case definitions for coronavirus disease 2019.
□ Review your infection prevention and control policies and CDC infection control recommendations for COVID-19 for:
□ Assessment and triage of patients with acute respiratory symptoms
□ Implementation of Standard, Contact, and Airborne Precautions, including the use of eye protection
□ Source control measures for patients (e.g put facemask on suspect patients)
□ Requirements for performing aerosol generating procedures
□ Be alert for patients who meet the persons under investigation (PUI) definition
□ Know how to report a potential COVID-19 case or exposure to facility infection control leads and public health officials
□ Know who, when, and how to seek evaluation by occupational health following an unprotected exposure (i.e not wearing recommended PPE) to a suspected or confirmed coronavirus disease  2019 patient
□ Remain at home, and notify occupational health services, if you are ill
□ Know how to contact and receive information from your state or local public health agency
The true impact of a COVID-19 outbreak in a U.S. community cannot be predicted.
However, all healthcare facilities can take steps now to prepare for such an outbreak and protect both their patients and staff.
Below are changes to the guidance as of June 9, 2020
CDC has been listening to and learning from the experiences of healthcare systems as they respond to COVID-19.
CDC has developed a list of Ten Ways Healthcare Systems Can Operate Effectively during the COVID-19 Pandemic.
Healthcare systems are encouraged to review and implement these approaches as they operate during the COVID-19 pandemic.
The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has changed how health care is delivered in the United States and has affected the operations of healthcare facilities.
Effects may include increases in patients seeking care for respiratory illness that could be COVID-19, deferring and delaying non-COVID-19 care, disruptions in supply chains, fluctuations in facilities occupancy, absenteeism among staff because of illness or caregiving responsibilities, and increases in mental health concerns.
Currently, no FDA-approved medications to treat COVID-19 or vaccines to prevent it are available.
Healthcare facilities need to provide care for all patients in the safest way possible for patients and healthcare personnel (HCP) and at the appropriate level, whether patients need home-based care, outpatient care, urgent care, emergency room care, inpatient care, or intensive care.
This guidance outlines goals and strategies for U.S. healthcare facilities to operate effectively and safely during the COVID-19 pandemic and provides links to CDC guidance on providing care in different settings and situations.
This guidance offers recommendations for healthcare facilities to 
During the COVID-19 pandemic, healthcare systems should adjust their standard approaches of delivering healthcare services to reduce the need to provide in-person care to minimize risk to patients and HCP.
For helpful considerations and strategies to provide telehealth services, please visit Using Telehealth to Expand Access to Essential Health Services during the COVID-19 Pandemic.
Telehealth services should be optimized, when available and appropriate.
The federal government has made telehealth services easier to implement and access (see: guidance for planning, preparing patients, and billing and reimbursementexternal icon for telehealth services).
CDC considers that telehealth could be used to deliver the following services:
When possible, manage mildly ill patients with COVID-19 at home.
In response to the infection prevention and control challenges posed by COVID-19, CDC has developed infection prevention and control recommendations for COVID-19 in healthcare settings.
These recommendations provide detailed guidance for care of patients with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 in healthcare settings and considerations for care of patients not suspected or confirmed to have COVID-19.
Healthcare facilities must be familiar with these recommendations and provide staff the necessary tools and training to effectively follow the guidance as part of a comprehensive strategy to manage operations during the COVID-19 pandemic.
CDC has also developed strategies for optimizing the supply of PPE in times of shortages.
To prevent SARS-CoV-2 transmission by symptomatic and pre-symptomatic persons, healthcare facilities should use source control for all persons entering a healthcare facility (e.g staff, patients, visitors).
As the pandemic continues, healthcare facilities must balance the need to provide necessary clinical services while minimizing risk to patients and HCP.
Because the effects of COVID-19 vary among communities, healthcare systems may consider the local level of COVID-19 transmission when making decisions about providing medical services for conditions other than COVID-19.
* Decisions should be made in concert with state and local public health authorities.
CDC has provided a Framework for Healthcare Systems Providing Non-COVID-19 Clinical Care during the COVID-19 Pandemic to help guide decision making.
Key considerations from the framework include:
Given the potential for asymptomatic transmission of SARS-CoV-2, HCP providing in-person care to patients not suspected or confirmed to have COVID-19 should follow recommended infection control practices to prevent transmission of infectious agents and infection control practices specific to COVID-19.
CDC has provided specific considerations for care of patients not suspected or confirmed to have COVID-19 when there are moderate or substantial levels of community transmission.
*Healthcare systems may consider the local level of COVID-19 transmission when making decisions about providing medical services for conditions other than COVID-19-COVID-19 care during the pandemic:
COVID-19Surge is a spreadsheet-based tool that hospital administrators and public health officials can use to estimate the surge in demand for hospital-based services during the COVID-19 pandemic.
A user of COVID-19Surge can produce estimates of the number of COVID-19 patients that need to be hospitalized, the number requiring ICU care, and the number requiring ventilator support.
The user can then compare those estimates with hospital capacity, using either existing capacity or estimates of expanded capacity.
With COVID-19Surge, users define the population in the hospital catchment area or local jurisdiction.
The user also enters the number of cases to date, and the available hospital resources (non-ICU beds, ICU beds, and mechanical ventilators).
Users can assess up to three community mitigation strategies simultaneously and compare the impacts on hospital resources versus a no intervention scenario.
Can COVID-19Surge be used to accurately estimate the impact of COVID-19?
The numbers generated through COVID-19Surge are estimates.
They DO NOT reflect what will actually occur during the pandemic.
Rather, they are estimates for a given set of scenarios.
COVID-19Surge should be used to plan and prepare a response to a surge in demand for hospital-based resources due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Can users change the input variables?
Yes.
When you download and open the COVID-19Surge, all inputs are pre-populated with numbers and estimates based on published sources.
Users can change the values in the tool that best illustrate the situation in their jurisdiction.
Further, we encourage users to change input values and explore the impact of various scenarios.
Explanations are provided in the accompanying manual.
COVID-19Surge uses the Windows* operating system (Microsoft Windows 2010 or higher) and Excel (Microsoft Office 2013 or higher).
The full functionality of COVID-19Surge is supported in the desktop version of Microsoft Office® for Windows.
Some functionality may not be available in Microsoft Office for Macs or in the browser version of Office 365.
*Microsoft Windows and Office are copyrighted products produced by Microsoft Corporation, WA.
The use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
We recommend downloading and saving the COVID-19Surge spreadsheet to your computer, then open the spreadsheet from your computer.
This will allow the spreadsheet to open in Excel instead of your web browser.
Open the COVID-19Surge spreadsheet and click the box at the top of the document that says, Enable Macros, or Enable Content (depending on version of Excel being used).
After enabling macros, click the Start button on the cover page to start navigating the tool.
If you encounter any issues, contact HEMU@cdc.gov with a subject line COVID-19Surge tool inquiry.
Below are some examples of the output produced by COVID-19Surge for a population of 1 million persons; results were calculated using the default values in the tool.
The top graph shows the estimated number of daily ICU beds  required under different intervention scenarios.
The bottom two graphs provide additional, detailed estimates of the number of daily ICU beds needed, assuming no intervention (bottom left) and (bottom right) assuming a medium intensity intervention (50% reduction in infectiousness due to community interventions).
The red lines shown in the two bottom graphs plot the available ICU beds.
The black lines show daily cases requiring ICU admittance, with the solid lines estimated assuming 2.6 persons infected per infectious person, and the dotted lines estimated assuming 2.0 persons infected per infectious person (note: not all lines are visible due to the scale).
A COVID-19Surge user can alter such output by readily changing one or more of the input values.
Example output: Estimated demand for ICU beds assuming different levels of effectiveness for community interventions
Example output: Details of estimated demand for ICU beds assuming different levels of: i) Numbers infected per infectious person (Ro); ii) effectiveness for community interventions
Planning for community spread of COVID-19 is critical for maintaining healthcare services during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
All U.S. hospitals should be prepared for the possible arrival of patients with COVID-19.
All hospitals should ensure their staff are trained, equipped and capable of practices needed to:
The following checklist can help hospitals assess and improve their preparedness for responding to a community-wide outbreak of COVID-19.
Each hospital will need to adapt this checklist to meet its unique needs and circumstances.
This checklist should be used as one of several tools for evaluating current plans or in developing a comprehensive COVID-19 preparedness plan.
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Hospital Preparedness Checklistpdf icon
Find signs for your clinic and infection prevention guidelines: www.cdc.gov/COVID19
Who is this for: Healthcare facilities that may be experiencing staffing shortages due to COVID-19
What is it for: To assist healthcare facilities in mitigating healthcare personnel staffing shortages that might occur because of COVID-19.
Maintaining appropriate staffing in healthcare facilities is essential to providing a safe work environment for healthcare personnel (HCP) and safe patient care.
As the COVID-19 pandemic progresses, staffing shortages will likely occur due to HCP exposures, illness, or need to care for family members at home.
Healthcare facilities must be prepared for potential staffing shortages and have plans and processes in place to mitigate these, including communicating with HCP about actions the facility is taking to address shortages and maintain patient and HCP safety and providing resources to assist HCP with anxiety and stress.
There are Contingency and Crisis Capacity Strategies that healthcare facilities should consider in these situations.
For example, if, despite efforts to mitigate, HCP staffing shortages occur, healthcare systems, facilities, and the appropriate state, local, territorial, and/or tribal health authorities might determine that HCP with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 could return to work before the full Return to Work Criteria have been met.
Several of the Crisis Capacity Strategies are dependent on HCP wearing a facemask for source control while at work.
Given ongoing shortages of personal protective equipment (PPE), facilities should refer to and implement relevant Strategies for Optimizing the Supply of Facemasks.
When staffing shortages are anticipated, healthcare facilities and employers, in collaboration with human resources and occupational health services, should use contingency capacity strategies to plan and prepare for mitigating this problem.
At baseline, healthcare facilities must:
Contingency capacity strategies for healthcare facilities include:
Adjusting staff schedules, hiring additional HCP, and rotating HCP to positions that support patient care activities.
Developing regional plans to identify designated healthcare facilities or alternate care sites with adequate staffing to care for patients with COVID-19.
Developing plans to allow asymptomatic HCP who have had an unprotected exposure to SARS-CoV-2 (the virus that causes COVID-19) but are not known to be infected to continue to work.
If HCP are tested and found to be infected with SARS-CoV-2, they should be excluded from work until they meet all Return to Work Criteria.
HCP with suspected SARS-CoV-2 infection should be prioritized for testing, as testing results will impact when they may return to work and for which patients they might be permitted to provide care.
Developing criteria to determine which HCP with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 (who are well enough and willing to work) could return to work in a healthcare setting before meeting all Return to Work Criteria—if staff shortages continue despite other mitigation strategies.
When staffing shortages are occurring, healthcare facilities and employers (in collaboration with human resources and occupational health services) may need to implement crisis capacity strategies to continue to provide patient care.
When there are no longer enough staff to provide safe patient care:
If HCP are permitted to return to work before meeting all Return to Work Criteria, they should still adhere to all Return to Work Practices and Work Restrictions recommendations described in that guidance.
These include:
Cloth face covering: Textile (cloth) covers are intended to keep the person wearing one from spreading respiratory secretions when talking, sneezing, or coughing.
They are not PPE and it is uncertain whether cloth face coverings protect the wearer.
CDC has guidance available on design, use, and maintenance of cloth face coverings.
Facemask: Facemasks are PPE and are often referred to as surgical masks or procedure masks.
Use facemasks according to product labeling and local, state, and federal requirements.
FDA-cleared surgical masks are designed to protect against splashes and sprays and are prioritized for use when such exposures are anticipated, including surgical procedures.
Facemasks that are not regulated by FDA, such as some procedure masks, which are typically used for isolation purposes, may not provide protection against splashes and sprays.
Respirator: A respirator is a personal protective device that is worn on the face, covers at least the nose and mouth, and is used to reduce the wearers risk of inhaling hazardous airborne particles (including dust particles and infectious agents), gases, or vapors.
Respirators, including those intended for use in healthcare are certified by the CDC/NIOSH.
Americas medical providers deliver the best care possible and are trusted sources of health information for their patients and the community.
CDC is committed to arming them with the accurate and helpful information they need to treat patients with COVID-19, keep other patients and staff safe, and empower patients to protect their own health.
Leveraging telemedicine whenever possible is the best way to protect patients and staff from COVID-19.
However, when telemedicine is not possible, simple actions can help to reduce the risk of spread and keep people safe.
CDCs Prepare to Care for COVID-19 is a resource with practical tools clinicians can use to care for patients with COVID-19, and will be regularly updated to help clinicians adapt as the outbreak unfolds.
Outdoors sign – Stop patients with symptoms of COVID-19.
Indoors sign – Refer patients with symptoms of COVID-19 to the front desk.
Patient handout with tips for home care.
pdf iconPDF – 1 Page | Spanishpdf icon | Chinesepdf icon | Vietnamesepdf icon | Koreanpdf icon

Factsheet – How to Put On &amp; Take Off PPE.
8.5×11 file pdf iconPDF – 2 pages

Poster – How to Put On &amp; Take Off PPE.
11×17 file pdf iconPDF – 1 page
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is working closely with international partners to respond to the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic.
CDC provides technical assistance to help other countries increase their ability to prevent, detect, and respond to health threats, including COVID-19.
This document is provided by CDC and is intended for use in non-US healthcare settings.
This document is intended to guide national-level coordination, healthcare facilities, and implementing partners in considering and planning high-priority IPC activities to prevent healthcare-associated transmission of SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19 virus).
Aspects of this document are relevant for all countries, but a focus is placed on priorities for low- and middle-income settings given resource constraints.
The goal of IPC activities in the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) response is to support the maintenance of essential healthcare services by preventing healthcare-associated transmission of SARS-CoV-2 among healthcare workers (HCW) and patients.
This document focuses on implementation of rapid identification of COVID-19 in healthcare facilities, which forms the basis for subsequent isolation, testing and management decisions.
Planning and coordination of activities should be conducted in collaboration with emergency response officials, in addition to relevant public health officials (e.g Ministry of Health, sub-national health offices, facility administration).
This document addresses specific details on prioritized activities around rapid identification of COVID-19 in healthcare facilities under four different epidemiological scenarios of COVID-19 transmission.
However, national and sub-national public health authorities and healthcare facilities in all countries should be doing certain core activities to support and prepare for the start of any of the activities outlined in section 5, regardless of the current state of COVID-19 transmission in the country.
National and sub-national public health authorities play a critical role in enabling priority IPC activities at healthcare facilities.
Specific areas of focus for national and sub-national authorities should include:
Note: there may be situations within a country whereby different geographic areas meet different scenario criteria.
Ministries of Health, in coordination with relevant stakeholders, should consider the appropriateness and feasibility of applying a single set of prioritized IPC activities across the country matched to the most severe transmission scenario met versus implementing multiple sets of prioritized IPC activities in differently affected geographic units.
Experience in this pandemic has shown that once a region is at scenario 2 (confirmed cases, no known community transmission), aggressive testing strategies of undiagnosed respiratory infections may quickly reveal underlying community transmission.
This can result in a rapid progression to scenario 4 (widespread community transmission), sometimes within a little as a week.
Thus it is absolutely critical that countries prepare aggressively for future epidemiologic scenarios even as the implement activities for their current situation.
Ministries of Health and healthcare facilities must act quickly once cases are identified to prevent and prepare for scenario 4 (widespread community transmission).
Limitations in laboratory testing can make implementing systematic triage for COVID-19 at inpatient facilities in countries with no known cases very challenging.
This is the priority activity in order to prevent COVID-19 patients from arriving unrecognized at healthcare facilities.
Carrying out widespread systematic COVID-19 triage at healthcare facilities when cases are all epidemiologically linked is of lower priority.
Systematic triage should be carried out widely in facilities with access to laboratory testing as this will allow the facility to quickly confirm cases for the purposes of isolation.
In areas without laboratory testing capacity, systematic triage should be carried out only at facilities that at are at high risk (e.g have a high likelihood of having cases) and can consider using a highly specific case definition (to avoid non COVID-19 cases being isolated with non-cases)
1 High-risk facilities should be defined by public health authorities considering: proximity to facilities or communities with known COVID-19 cases, including those across administrative or international borders as well as prioritizing facilities seeing large numbers of patients at high risk of being a COVID-19 case and where introduction would be highly disruptive (e.g large referral hospitals)
Regardless of epidemiologic scenario in a country, once an inpatient facility is housing suspected or confirmed COVID-19 cases, specific IPC precautions for isolation will apply.
These are outlined by the World Health Organization and accessible at the links below.
Pursuant to this document, facilities with confirmed cases may need to carry out prioritized activities from other epidemiologic scenarios even if those scenarios do not represent the country-wide COVID-19 situation.
This could include, for instance, a hospital with confirmed COVID-19 cases choosing to conduct active screening of healthcare workers for signs and symptoms of COVID-19, despite this not being listed under the routine priority activities in that countrys epidemiologic scenario.
National readiness (WHO): https://www.who.int/publications-detail/national-capacities-review-tool-for-a-novelcoronavirusexternal icon
WHO COVID-19 surveillance definition: https://www.who.int/publications-detail/global-surveillance-for-human-infection-with-novel-coronavirus-(2019-ncov)external icon
WHO guidance on infection prevention and control: https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/technical-guidance/infection-prevention-and-controlexternal icon
WHO Pandemic flu planning checklist (see section 4.0): https://www.who.int/influenza/preparedness/pandemic/influenza_risk_management_checklist_2018/en/external icon
CDC would like to acknowledge April Baller, MD, Infection Prevention and Control Lead, World Health Emergency Programme and Maria Clara Padoveze RN, PhD, Technical officer, IPC unit at the World Health Organization.
This document is provided by CDC for use in non-US healthcare settings.
This slide deck is a reference for content on this page and can be used for training.
This tool is to be used to assess the triage process based on this Standard Operating Procedure (SOP).
This document is intended for healthcare facilities that are receiving or are preparing to receive patients with suspected or confirmed coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
This includes healthcare facilities providing either inpatient or outpatient services.
It should be used to guide implementation of procedures at triage that can be effective at preventing transmission of SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19 virus) to patients and healthcare workers (HCWs).
This document was developed based on current COVID-19 data and experience with other respiratory viruses and will be updated as more information becomes available.
The sorting out and classificationexternal icon of patientsexternal icon or casualties to determine priority of need and proper place of treatmentexternal icon.1   During infectious disease outbreaks, triage is particularly important to separate patients likely to be infected with the pathogen of concern.
This triage SOP is developed in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic and does not replace any routine clinical triage already in place in healthcare facilities (e.g.
Manchester triage system or equivalent2) to categorize patients into different urgency categories.
The main route of transmission of COVID-19 is through respiratory droplets generated when an infected person coughs or sneezes.
Any person who is in close contact with someone who has respiratory symptoms (e.g sneezing, coughing, etc.)
is at risk of being exposed to potentially infective respiratory droplets.3   Droplets may also land on surfaces where the virus could remain viable for several hours to days.
Transmission can occur from hands contacting contaminated surfaces and then coming into contact with the persons mucosa such as nose, mouth and eyes.
*defined as patients at high risk for having COVID-19 based on clinical and epidemiologic criteria (e.g travel history or exposure to someone with confirmed or suspected COVID-19).
Definition may change depending on where countries or regions within countries are in the stage of outbreak (e.g.
no or limited vs. widespread community transmission).
See Appendix 3 for the different epidemiologic scenarios.
CDC acknowledges April Baller, MD, Infection Prevention and Control Lead, WHO Health Emergency and Maria Clara Padoveze, RN, PhD, Technical officer, IPC unit, WHO for their valuable contributions to this SOP.
Countries with no or limited community transmission (cases in the community are linked to known chain of transmission)


Countries with widespread community transmission (inability to relate confirmed cases though chains of transmission for large number of COVID-19 cases)
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is working closely with international partners to respond to the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic.
CDC provides technical assistance to help other countries increase their ability to prevent, detect, and respond to health threats, including COVID-19.
This document is provided by CDC and is intended for use in non-US healthcare settings.
This slide deck is a reference for content on this page and can be used for training
This document provides guidance on the identification or screening of healthcare workers (HCWs)1 and inpatients with suspected COVID-19.
Rational, requirements, and considerations will be discussed for three broad case identification strategies:
To support the activities for these strategies, this document provides an initial discussion on the importance of defining the signs/symptoms of persons with COVID-19, general best practices, and surveillance capacities.
Uncertainty remains in defining a generalizable set of characteristic signs and symptoms for COVID-19.
At best, current evidence suggests substantial variability ranging from mild to severe and based on only partially described patient-level factors.
The most commonly reported signs and symptoms in the current literature include:
However, additional non-specific or atypical symptoms include:
Further, elderly patients may present differently than younger populations.
Given these limitations, facilities should define a standardized set of signs and symptoms (e.g fever and/or cough/shortness of breath) to screen HCWs and patients for suspected COVID-19.
A high level of suspicion is critical to ensure cases do not go unrecognized due to likely substantial proportion of patients and healthcare workers presenting with atypical or minimal symptoms.
In addition to a specific strategy for the identification of suspected COVID-19 cases, there are general best practices that will improve both healthcare worker and inpatient COVID-19 screening.
Some examples include:
Monitor and Manage Ill and Exposed Healthcare Workers
Establish Reporting within and between Healthcare Facilities and to Public Health Authorities
Facility-based surveillance for healthcare-associated infections (HAIs), including infections in healthcare workers and inpatients, is one of the WHOs eight core components of infection prevention and control.
While surveillance is a critical component of providing safe healthcare, it is important to recognize that it requires expertise, good quality data, and an established infection prevention and control (IPC) program and thus, may require time to set up2.
For this reason, during public health emergency response, healthcare facilities are encouraged to initially implement facility-based suspect COVID-19 patient case finding (surveillance) feasible with existing surveillance capacities.
Health facility surveillance capacity varies greatly even within health systems.
A realistic appraisal of capacity can help identify the best strategy for a given context.
A general description of surveillance capacities based on existing HAI surveillance activity is provided for guidance.
Objective:  Prevent exposure of at-risk patients and staff to symptomatic COVID-19 positive healthcare workers.
Figure: Passive identification of healthcare workers with suspected COVID-19
All healthcare workers self-assess for fever and/or a defined set of newly present symptoms indicative of COVID-19.
If fever or respiratory symptoms are present, healthcare workers:
Establishes mechanisms for the identification of healthcare workers at increased likelihood of infection with minimal resource requirements.
Figure: Enhanced passive identification of healthcare workers with suspected COVID-19
In addition to passive strategy, establish a plan to remind or prompt workers to self-assess for symptoms consistent with COVID-19.
Common reminders include automated text messages or phone calls.
Evidence suggests that simple automatic reminders can increase adherence.
Figure: Active identification of healthcare workers with suspected COVID-19
All healthcare workers present for in-person evaluation of symptoms and fever prior to each shift.
If symptoms consistent of COVID-19 are reported or observed, healthcare workers are provided with immediate follow-up actions.
All healthcare workers report (e.g by call or text) the absence or presence of symptoms consistent with COVID-19 remotely each day.
Staff that fail to report or report symptoms are followed up.
While there is limited evidence for the benefit of active healthcare worker monitoring, active strategies will theoretically result in increased healthcare worker adherence to self-evaluation of symptoms, thus enhancing patient protection.
The development of acute respiratory infection and healthcare-associated pneumonia are common complications of hospitalization.
However, it is important that clinicians maintain a high level of suspicion for COVID-19 when there is a compatible presentation.
Because healthcare facilities often represent a gathering of individuals at higher risk of infection and adverse outcome, the potential of outbreak and harm to patients requires special effort to ensure any inpatient COVID-19 cases are identified.
A goal of identifying inpatients with suspected COVID-19 is to guide infection prevention and control (IPC) strategies to prevent or limit transmission in healthcare setting.
See interim WHO guidance hereexternal icon7.
Figure: Passive strategy for identification of inpatients with suspected COVID-19
Clinicians are also made aware of what to do if they suspect COVID-19 in a hospitalized patient, including isolation precautions, PPE use, reporting/informing IPC focal point at the facility and public health authorities, and how to obtain testing, if available
Applicable at all HAI surveillance capacity levels (i.e Very Low to High)
Minimal disruption of existing clinical practice and no requirement for standardized data collection or form completion.
Strategy seeks to encourage recognition and reporting by astute clinicians.
Figure: Enhanced passive strategy for identification of inpatients with suspected COVID-19
Enhancement of the passive strategy can be achieved through establishing systems that prompt or require clinicians to regularly review all patients as to their likelihood of harboring COVID-19.
Example enhanced passive strategies might include:
Applicable in most HAI surveillance capacity levels (very low to high)
Dialog and accountability for case finding and reporting can improve empirical case determination, ensure patient evaluations are not missed, and help avoid clinician complacency over the long term
Figure: Active strategy for identification of inpatients with suspected COVID-19
Active case identification involves targeted data collection and review of patient information by groups specifically responsible for the identification of suspected COVID-19 cases.
Examples of groups responsible for case identification and active case identification may include:
High existing surveillance capacity or medium capacity with the provision of additional resources
Smaller more centralized team responsible for case identification can increase overall quality through dedicated training, improved engagement, limiting of competing priorities, and standardization of methods
REFER TO WHO HEREexternal icon FOR CURRENT COVID-19 SURVEILLANCE AND CASE DEFINITIONS
See: https://www.who.int/publications-detail/global-surveillance-for-human-infection-with-novel-coronavirus-(2019-ncov)external icon for details.
Currently, a confirmed case is a person with laboratory confirmation of infection with the COVID-19 virus, irrespective of clinical signs and symptoms.
CDC would like to acknowledge April Baller, MD, Infection Prevention and Control Lead, World Health Emergency Programme and Maria Clara Padoveze RN, PhD, Technical officer, IPC unit at the World Health Organization.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is working closely with international partners to respond to the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic.
CDC provides technical assistance to help other countries increase their ability to prevent, detect, and respond to health threats, including COVID-19.
This document is provided by CDC and is intended for use in non-US healthcare settings.
This document provides guidance to healthcare facilities on the management of visitors to reduce the risk of transmission of SARS-CoV-2, also known as COVID-19 virus, to visitors of patients with suspected or confirmed COVID-19.
This document also considers preventing introduction of SARS-CoV2 into healthcare facilities by visitors during periods of community transmission; the risk of introduction into facilities increases as community transmission becomes more widespread.
Facilities should establish policies and procedures for managing, screening, educating, and training all visitors.
This slide deck is a reference for content on this page and can be used for training.
1 Refer here for WHO advice on the use of masks in the context of COVID-19: https://www.who.int/publications-detail/advice-on-the-use-of-masks-in-the-community-during-home-care-and-in-healthcare-settings-in-the-context-of-the-novel-coronavirus-(2019-ncov)-outbreakexternal icon
2 Caregivers are defined as parents, spouses, other family members or friends without formal healthcare training per WHO interim guidance for home care for patients with suspected novel coronavirus (COVID-19) infection presenting with mild symptoms, and management of their contacts.
Available from: https://www.who.int/publications-detail/home-care-for-patients-with-suspected-novel-coronavirus-(ncov)-infection-presenting-with-mild-symptoms-and-management-of-contactsexternal icon
3 Refer here for definition of individuals at high risk of COVID-19: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/specific-groups/high-risk-complications.html
Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Suspected or Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Healthcare Settings
WHO Infection prevention and control of epidemic- and pandemic-prone acute respiratory infections in health careexternal icon
WHO Rational use of personal protective equipment for coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)pdf iconexternal icon
Gopalakrishna G, Choo P, Leo YS, Tay BK, Lim YT, Khan AS, Tan CC.
SARS transmission and hospital containment.
Emerg Infect Dis.
2004 Mar;10(3):395-400.
Lee NE, Siriarayapon P, Tappero J, Chen KT, Shuey D, Limpakarnjanarat K, Chavavanich A, Dowell SF; SARS Mobile Response Team Investigators.
Infection control practices for SARS in Lao Peoples Democratic Republic, Taiwan, and Thailand: experience from mobile SARS containment teams, 2003.
Am J Infect Control.
2004 Nov;32(7):377-83.
Mizumoto K, Kagaya K, Zarebski A, Chowell G. Estimating the asymptomatic proportion of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) cases on board the Diamond Princess cruise ship, Yokohama, Japan, 2020.
Euro Surveill.
2020 Mar;25(10).
Rothe C, Schunk M, Sothmann P, Bretzel G, Froeschl G, Wallrauch C, Zimmer T, Thiel V, Janke C, Guggemos W, Seilmaier M, Drosten C, Vollmar P, Zwirglmaier K, Zange S, Wölfel R, Hoelscher M. Transmission of 2019-nCoV Infection from an Asymptomatic Contact in Germany.
N Engl J Med.
2020 Mar 5;382(10):970-971.
Weber DJ, Rutala WA, Fischer WA, Kanamori H, Sickbert-Bennett EE.
Emerging infectious diseases: Focus on infection control issues for novel coronaviruses (Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome-CoV and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome-CoV), hemorrhagic fever viruses (Lassa and Ebola), and highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses, A(H5N1) and A(H7N9).
Am J Infect Control.
2016 May 2;44(5 Suppl):e91-e100.
CDC would like to acknowledge the contributions of April Baller, MD, IPC Lead, WHO Health Emergency Programme, Maria Clara Padoveze, RN, PhD, Technical Officer, IPC Unit, WHO, and Benedetta Allegranzi, MD, Technical Lead, IPC Unit, WHO.
Available for Downloadppt icon
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is working closely with international partners to respond to the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic.
CDC provides technical assistance to help other countries increase their ability to prevent, detect, and respond to health threats, including COVID-19.
This document is provided by CDC and is intended for use in non-US healthcare settings.
This slide deck is a reference for content on this page and can be used for training.
While new discoveries continue to be made about COVID-19, early reports indicate that person-to-person transmission most often occurs during close contact with an individual infected with SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.
Healthcare workers (HCWs) are not only at higher risk of infection but can also amplify outbreaks within healthcare facilities if they become ill. Identifying and managing HCWs who have been exposed to a patient with COVID-19 is of great importance in preventing healthcare transmission and protecting staff and vulnerable patients in healthcare settings.
These operational considerations are intended to be used by healthcare facilities and public health authorities in non-U.S. healthcare settings, particularly focusing on low- and middle-income countries, assisting with the management of HCWs exposed to a person with suspected or confirmed COVID-19.
This includes but is not limited to:
The goals of HCW risk assessment, work restriction, and monitoring are to:
This document is only intended to advise on the management of HCWs regarding their work within healthcare facilities.
Guidance on management of exposed HCWs outside of healthcare facilities (e.g quarantine, travel-restriction) is beyond the scope of this document.
Recommendations are made based on currently available data and subject to change when new information becomes available.
Healthcare worker – all paid and unpaid persons serving in healthcare settings who have the potential for direct or indirect exposure to patients or their infectious secretions and materials (e.g doctors, nurses, laboratory workers, facility or maintenance workers, clinical trainees, volunteers).
Low risk exposure – contact with a person with COVID-19 having not met criteria for high-risk exposure (e.g brief interactions with COVID-19 patients in the hospital or in the community).
Active monitoring – healthcare facility or public health authority establishes a minimum of daily communication with exposed HCWs to assess for the presence of fever or symptoms consistent with COVID-193.
Monitoring could involve in-person temperature and symptom checks or remote contact (e.g telephone or electronic-based communication).
Self-monitoring – HCWs monitor themselves for fever by taking their temperature twice a day and remaining alert for respiratory and other symptoms that may be compatible with COVID-19.
HCWs are provided a plan for whom to contact if they develop fever or even mild symptoms during the self-monitoring period to determine whether medical evaluation and testing is needed.
Healthcare facilities may choose to manage exposed HCWs in a variety of ways and may consider multiple factors when deciding on a management strategy for exposed HCWs, including:
All healthcare facilities should have an established communication plan for notifying appropriate public health authorities of any HCW who requires testing for COVID-19 during the monitoring period.
Staff should be aware of the established procedures for HCWs who have been exposed to a person with COVID-19, and facilities should develop paid sick leave policies and contract extensions that support the ability for staff to avoid work when ill.
The accompanying flowchart see Figure describes possible scenarios for risk assessment of exposed HCWs.
Any HCW exposed to a person with COVID-19 in a healthcare facility or in the community should be quickly identified and assessed for fever or symptoms of COVID-19.
If found to be symptomatic, they should be immediately restricted from work until a medical evaluation can be completed and testing for COVID-19 considered.
If the exposed worker is not symptomatic, an assessment can be done to determine the risk category of exposure, necessary work restriction, and monitoring for 14 days see Appendix 1.
Ideally, HCWs who had a high-risk exposure should be restricted from work and remain quarantined with active monitoring for COVID-19 symptoms for 14 days after the date of last exposure.
If at any time the worker develops fever or symptoms, they should undergo medical evaluation and COVID-19 testing, if indicated.
Those who test negative should continue to be restricted from work, actively monitored, and may return to work at the end of the monitoring period if symptoms are resolved.
Those HCWs who remain asymptomatic over the monitoring period may likewise return to work after 14 days.
See below Considerations When Resources are Limited for alternative strategies if staffing shortages prevent the ability to restrict HCWs from work.
HCWs who had a low-risk exposure and are considered essential staff may continue to work during the 14 days after their last exposure to a patient with COVID-19.
These HCWs should preferably be assigned to care for patients with COVID-19 and should perform self-monitoring twice a day.
If the worker is scheduled for a shift, they should take their temperature and self-evaluate for symptoms before reporting to work.
Healthcare facilities can consider establishing protocols in which HCWs under self-monitoring report their temperature and symptom status to IPC staff, employee/occupational health, or a designated supervisor prior to beginning a shift.
If the HCW develops fever or symptoms, they should:
If testing is negative and symptoms are resolved, they may return to work while observing standard precautions and continuing to self-monitor for the remainder of the 14 days.
Some facilities have instructed any exposed staff that continue working during the 14 days post-exposure (e.g asymptomatic low-risk exposure or staff who had symptoms, tested negative and returned to work within the exposure period) to wear a medical mask at all times in the facility to reduce the risk of asymptomatic or pre-symptomatic transmission.
Any HCW who tests positive for COVID-19, either in the course of monitoring after an exposure or otherwise, should be immediately restricted from work and public health notified for further case management.
There may be situations in which healthcare facilities are unable to perform contact tracing of all HCWs exposed to a patient with confirmed COVID-19 or to carry out an individual risk assessment for all exposed HCWs.
Some of these scenarios include:
Some facilities have developed a plan for all HCWs to report absence of fever and symptoms to a chosen POC before starting work each day for accountability purposes.
When overall testing capacity has been limited and must be rationed, facilities and public health authorities have prioritized symptomatic HCWs for testing over low-risk groups in the community (e.g young healthy individuals).
If no testing is available, for the purposes of returning to work, these HCWs have been managed as if potentially infected with SARS-CoV-2 and can return to work based on the strategies described below.
Previous U.S. CDC and WHO recommendations included a symptom-based strategy and a test-based strategy for returning HCWs with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 to work or discontinue isolation.
As described in a Decision Memo, U.S. CDC no longer recommends a test-based strategy based on current evidence.
This is consistent with a WHO Scientific Briefexternal icon on discontinuation of isolation for COVID-19.
Replication-competent virus has not been recovered after 10 days following symptom onset among individuals with mild to moderate COVID-19 illness.
In severely or critically ill patients, including some with severely immunocompromising conditions, an estimated 95% no longer have replication-competent virus 15 days after onset of symptoms.
While individuals may continue to shed detectable SARS-CoV-2 RNA beyond these time points, a test-based strategy is no longer recommended, with rare exception, because in the majority of cases it results in excluding from work HCWs who continue to shed virus but are no longer infectious.
U.S. CDC recommendations for a symptom-based strategy to determine when HCWs can return to work: 
HCWs with mild to moderate illness 5 who are not severely immunocompromised 6:
Note: HCWs who are not severely immunocompromised and were asymptomatic throughout their infection may return to work when at least 10 days have passed since the date of their first positive viral diagnostic test.
HCW with severe to critical illness5 or who are severely immunocompromised: 
Note: HCWs who are severely immunocompromised but who were asymptomatic throughout their infection may return to work when at least 10 days and up to 20 days have passed since the date of their first positive viral diagnostic test.
The exact criteria that determine which HCWs will shed replication-competent virus for longer periods are not known.
Disease severity factors and the presence of immunocompromising conditions should be considered in determining the appropriate duration of isolation (see footnotes 5 and 6).
Consultation with infection control experts should be considered to determine the optimal time for an individual HCW to return to work.
Per the WHO Scientific Briefexternal icon, countries can choose to continue to use a laboratory testing algorithm as part of the criteria for releasing infected individuals from isolation.
Countries that decide to adopt a test-based strategy for returning HCWs to work should take into consideration the limitations of this approach, including HCWs who continue to shed virus but are no longer infectious and strain on testing resources.
CDC and WHO recommend all HCWs wear a medical mask for universal source control if there is SARS-CoV-2 transmission in the community.
For countries that are not using medical masks for universal source control, HCWs returning to work after SARS-CoV-2 infection should wear a medical mask at all times while in the healthcare facility until all symptoms are completely resolved or at baseline.
After returning to work, HCWs should continue to adhere to hand hygiene, respiratory hygiene, and cough etiquette at all times, and continue to self-monitor for symptoms, seeking medical evaluation if fever or respiratory symptoms worsen or recur.
CDC testing and return to work guidance is based upon currently available evidence and is subject to change as more information becomes available.
Please see CDC Criteria for Return to Work for Healthcare Personnel with Suspected or Confirmed COVID-19 (Interim Guidance) for further updates to these recommendations.
Figure: Flowchart for management of HCWs with exposure to a person with COVID-19 
1Living in the same household as a person with COVID-19; having direct physical contact with a person with COVID-19 (e.g shaking hands) or with their infectious secretions (e.g being coughed on or touching used tissues without gloves); being within 1 meter for 15 minutes or longer with a person with COVID-19 (e.g meeting room, workspace, classroom, or traveling in a conveyance), per WHO guidanceexternal icon.2Appropriate PPE as defined by World Health Organization (WHO) Infection prevention and control during health care when novel coronavirus (nCoV) infection is suspectedexternal icon.
3Subjective or measured fever, cough, or shortness of breath.
HCW should also monitor for mild or atypical symptoms that have been reported in association with COVID-19, including sore throat, runny nose, fatigue, muscle aches, loss of taste or smell, and gastrointestinal symptoms.
For mild or atypical symptoms, medical evaluation and testing should be considered on a case-by-case basis.
If index of suspicion is low, can consider continued symptomatic monitoring and reserve testing for new or worsening symptoms.
4Aerosol-generating procedures include, but are not limited to: tracheal intubation, non-invasive ventilation, tracheotomy, cardiopulmonary resuscitation, manual ventilation before intubation, bronchoscopyexternal icon.
5 Adapted from National Institutes of Health COVID-19 Treatment Guidelinesexternal icon.
Mild Illness: Individuals who have any of the various signs and symptoms of COVID-19 (e.g fever, cough, sore throat, malaise, headache, muscle pain) without shortness of breath, dyspnea, or abnormal chest imaging.
Moderate Illness: Individuals who have evidence of lower respiratory disease by clinical assessment or imaging and a saturation of oxygen (SpO2) ≥94% on room air at sea level.
Severe Illness: Individuals who have respiratory frequency &gt;30 breaths per minute, SpO2 &lt;94% on room air at sea level (or, for patients with chronic hypoxemia, a decrease from baseline of &gt;3%), ratio of arterial partial pressure of oxygen to fraction of inspired oxygen (PaO2/FiO2) &lt;300 mmHg, or lung infiltrates &gt;50%.
Critical Illness: Individuals who have respiratory failure, septic shock, and/or multiple organ dysfunction
6 The studies used to inform this guidance did not clearly define severely immunocompromised.
For the purposes of this guidance, CDC used the following definition:
Appendix 1: Risk Assessment for Healthcare Workers Exposed to Persons with COVID-19
PDFpdf icon | Word word icon3 pages
Appendix 2: Self-Monitoring Form for Asymptomatic Healthcare Workers with Low-Risk Exposure
PDFpdf icon | Word word icon2 pages
Currently, those at greatest risk of infection are persons who have had prolonged, unprotected close contact (i.e within 6 feet for 15 minutes or longer) with a patient with confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection, regardless of whether the patient has symptoms.
Persons frequently in congregate settings (e.g homeless shelters, assisted living facilities, college or university dormitories) are at increased risk of acquiring infection because of the increased likelihood of close contact.
Those who live in or have recently been to areas with sustained transmission may also be at higher risk of infection.
All persons can reduce the risk to themselves and others by wearing a mask, practicing physical distancing, washing their hands often, and taking other prevention measures.
For more information, see Risk Assessment and Your Health.
To prevent transmission of SARS-CoV-2 outside of work, HCP should follow CDCs Guidance on Public Health Recommendations for Community-Related Exposure and the general guidance at Your Health.
Because of their potential for exposure to SARS-CoV-2 at work, some HCP may choose to implement extra measures when arriving home from providing healthcare, such as removing any clothing they wore while delivering healthcare, taking off their shoes, washing their clothing, and immediately showering.
However, these practices are optional and based on a personal decision; there is insufficient evidence to determine whether these additional practices can lower infection risk.
Because person-to-person transmission through respiratory droplets within a radius of 6 feet is currently thought to be the main way the virus spreads, everyone — including HCP —can reduce the risk to themselves and others by wearing a mask, practicing physical distancing, washing their hands often, and taking other prevention measures.
CDC updates its guidance, including specific guidance in the links above, as additional information becomes available.
COVID-19 is a new disease and CDC is learning more about it every day.
Among adults, the risk for severe illness from COVID-19 increases with age, with older adults at highest risk.
Severe illness means that the person with COVID-19 may require hospitalization, intensive care, or a ventilator to help them breathe, or they may even die.
People of any age with certain underlying medical conditions are also at increased risk for severe illness from SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Based on what we know at this time, pregnant people might be at an increased risk for severe illness from SARS-CoV-2 infection compared with non-pregnant people.
Additionally, there may be an increased risk for adverse pregnancy outcomes, such as preterm birth, among people who get sick with COVID-19 during pregnancy.
Additional resources for healthcare providers
Pregnant HCP should follow risk assessment and infection control guidelines for HCP exposed to patients with suspected or confirmed COVID-19.
Adherence to recommended infection prevention and control practices is an important part of protecting all HCP in healthcare settings.
Based on what we know at this time, pregnant people might be at an increased risk for severe illness from SARS-CoV-2 infection compared to non-pregnant people.
Additionally, there may be an increased risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes, such as preterm birth, among pregnant people with COVID-19.
Facilities may want to consider limiting exposure of pregnant HCP to patients with confirmed or suspected COVID-19, especially during higher risk procedures (e.g aerosol-generating procedures) if feasible based on staffing availability.
Children and adolescents with MIS-C have presented with a persistent fever and a variety of signs and symptoms including involvement of multiple organs (e.g cardiac, gastrointestinal, renal, hematologic, dermatologic, neurologic) and elevated inflammatory markers.
CDC is collaborating with domestic and international partners to better understand this new syndrome, including how common it is and its risk factors.
For more information, including a full case definition and how to report MIS-C to your health department, visit MIS-C Information for Healthcare Providers.
Yes.
To keep patients and healthcare personnel (HCP) healthy and safe, CDCs infection prevention and control guidance applies to all settings where healthcare is delivered.
However, as with any guidance, facilities can tailor certain recommendations to their setting.
For example, inpatient psychiatric care includes communal experiences and group activities that may need to continue.
If so, these activities might need to be adapted to align with social distancing recommendations.
Other recommended infection control measures (for example, ensuring access to alcohol-based hand sanitizer, cohorting patients with COVID-19 and assigning dedicated staff, or implementing universal source control measures) might not be safe or appropriate to implement in all locations or for all patients due to security and behavioral concerns.
Challenges and potential solutions specific to behavioral health settings might include:
Facilities should follow the reporting requirements of their state or jurisdiction.
Those regulated by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) (e.g nursing homes) should also follow all CMS requirementspdf iconexternal icon, which are being updated to include new requirements for reporting to CDC and to residents and their representatives.
In addition, CDC recommends that health departments be promptly notified about:
These could signal an outbreak of COVID-19 or other respiratory disease in the facility.
The health department can provide important guidance to assist with case finding and halting transmission.
The facility should also have a plan and mechanism to regularly communicate with residents, family members, and HCP, including if cases of COVID-19 are identified in the facility.
Often, information in nursing homes is communicated through town hall meetings and staff meetings, along with letters or emails.
However, during the COVID-19 pandemic, in-person gatherings should not occur.
Instead, communication should occur through virtual meetings over phone or web platforms.
These should be supplemented with written communications that provide contact information for a staff member who can respond to questions or concerns.
Communications should include information describing the current situation, plans for limiting spread within the facility, and recommended actions they can take to protect themselves and others.
Facilities should make this information available in a timely manner and offer periodic updates as the situation develops and more information becomes available.
No.
For patients hospitalized with SARS-CoV-2 infection, decisions about discharge from the hospital should be based on their clinical status and the ability of an accepting facility to meet their care needs and adhere to recommended infection prevention and control practices.
Decisions about hospital discharge are distinct from decisions about discontinuation of Transmission-Based Precautions.
For patients with suspected or confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection, decisions about discontinuing Transmission-Based Precautions should be based on the strategies outlined here.
The test-based strategy is recommended only for use in limited circumstances.
If a patient with suspected or confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection has not met criteria for discontinuing Transmission-Based Precautions, they should be transferred to a facility with the ability to adhere to infection prevention and control recommendations for the care of residents with SARS-CoV-2 infection, including placement in a unit or area of the facility designated to care for residents with SARS-CoV-2 infection and provision of recommended personal protective equipment to healthcare personnel.
If the patient has met the criteria for discontinuing Transmission-Based Precautions, they do not require additional restrictions.
A patient hospitalized for non-COVID-related illnesses who is not known to have SARS-CoV-2 infection can be transferred to a nursing home without testing.
To ensure a patient was not exposed and might subsequently develop SARS-CoV-2 infection, nursing homes should place the patient in Transmission-based Precautions in a separate observation area or in a single-person room for 14 days after admission.
As part of universal source control measures, all residents (including those described in the scenarios above) should wear a cloth face covering or facemask (if tolerated) whenever they leave their room.
As part of routine practices, healthcare personnel (HCP) should be applying Standard Precautions.
HCP should always deliberately assess potential risks of exposure to infectious material before engaging in activities and procedures in healthcare delivery.
Based on their risk assessment, safe work practices, including engineering controls that reduce the release of infectious material, administrative controls, and use of personal protective equipment (PPE) should be implemented at the point of care according to CDC guidelines and standards of practice for the activity performed.
To reduce SARS-CoV-2 exposure during the COVID-19 pandemic, CDC recommends that facilities:
If surgery or procedures cannot be postponed, HCP caring for patients with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 should adhere to all recommended infection prevention and control practices for COVID-19.
This includes:
Because SARS-CoV-2 can be transmitted by individuals who are infected but do not have symptoms, some infected individuals will not be identified by screening for clinical signs and symptoms.
HCP providing surgical or procedural care to patients not suspected of having SARS-CoV-2 infection should use a tiered approach based on the level of community transmission to inform the need for universal eye protection and respirator use.
HCP should continue to use eye protection or an N95 or equivalent or higher-level respirator whenever recommended for patient care as a part of Standard or Transmission-Based Precautions.
In addition to the use of universal PPE and source control in healthcare settings, targeted SARS-CoV-2 testing of patients without signs or symptoms of COVID-19 might be used to identify those with asymptomatic or pre-symptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection and further reduce risk for exposures in some healthcare settings.
Depending on guidance from local and state health departments, testing availability, and how rapidly results are available, facilities can consider implementing pre-admission or pre-procedure diagnostic testing with authorized nucleic acid or antigen detection assays for SARS-CoV-2.
Testing results might inform decisions about rescheduling elective procedures or about the need for additional Transmission-Based Precautions when caring for the patient.
Limitations of using this testing strategy include obtaining negative results in patients during their incubation period who later become infectious and false negative test results, depending on the test method used.
CDCs guidance to use NIOSH-approved N95 disposable filtering facepiece or higher level respirators when providing care for patients with suspected or known COVID-19 is based on the current understanding of SARS-CoV-2 and related respiratory viruses.
Current data suggest that close-range aerosol transmission by droplet and inhalation, and contact followed by self-delivery to the eyes, nose, or mouth are likely routes of transmission.
Long-range aerosol transmission, such as is seen with measles, has not been a feature of SARS-CoV-2.
Potential routes of close-range transmission include splashes and sprays of infectious material onto mucous membranes and inhalation of infectious virions exhaled by an infected person.
The relative contribution of each of these is not known for SARS-Co-V-2.
Facemasks commonly used during surgical procedures will provide barrier protection against droplet sprays contacting mucous membranes of the nose and mouth, but they are not designed to protect wearers from inhaling small particles.
N95 and higher level respirators, such as other disposable filtering facepiece respirators, powered air-purifying respirators (PAPRs), and elastomeric respirators, provide both barrier and respiratory protection because of their tight fit and filtration characteristics.
Respirators should be used as part of a respiratory protection program that provides staff with medical evaluations, training, and fit testing.
Although facemasks are routinely used for the care of patients with common viral respiratory infections, N95 or higher level respirators are routinely recommended for emerging pathogens like SARS CoV-2, which have the potential for transmission via small particles, the ability to cause severe infections, and no specific treatments or vaccines.
CDC recommendations acknowledge the current challenges with limited supplies of N95s and other respirators.
Facilities that do not have sufficient supplies of N95s and other respirators for all patient care should prioritize their use for activities and procedures that pose high risks of generating infectious aerosols and use facemasks for care that does not involve those activities or procedures.
Detailed strategies for optimizing the supply of N95 respirators are available on the CDC website.
Once availability of supplies is reestablished, the guidance states that the use of N95 and higher level respirators should resume.
In general, transport and movement of a patient with suspected or confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection outside of their room should be limited to medically essential purposes.
If being transported outside of the room, such as to radiology, healthcare personnel (HCP) in the receiving area should be notified in advance of transporting the patient.
For transport, the patient should wear a facemask or cloth face covering (if tolerated) to contain secretions and be covered with a clean sheet.
If transport personnel must prepare the patient for transport (e.g transfer them to the wheelchair or gurney), transport personnel should wear all recommended PPE (gloves, a gown, respiratory protection that is at least as protective as a fit tested NIOSH-certified disposable N95 filtering facepiece respirator or facemask—if a respirator is not available—and eye protection i.e goggles or disposable face shield that covers the front and sides of the face).
This recommendation is needed because these interactions typically involve close, often face-to-face, contact with the patient in an enclosed space (e.g patient room).
Once the patient has been transferred to the wheelchair or gurney (and prior to exiting the room), transporters should remove their gown and gloves and perform hand hygiene.
The transporter should continue to wear a respirator or facemask.
The continued use of eye protection by the transporter is also recommended if there is potential that the patient might not be able to tolerate their facemask or cloth face covering for the duration of transport.
Additional PPE should not be required unless there is an anticipated need to provide medical assistance during transport (e.g helping the patient replace a dislodged facemask).
After arrival at their destination, receiving personnel (e.g in radiology) and the transporter (if assisting with transfer) should perform hand hygiene and wear all recommended PPE.
If still wearing their original respirator or facemask and eye protection, the transporter should take care to avoid self-contamination when donning the remainder of the recommended PPE.
This cautious approach will be refined and updated as more information becomes available and as response needs change in the United States.
Interim guidance for EMS personnel transporting patients with confirmed or suspected SARS-CoV-2 infection is available here.
EMS personnel should wear all recommended PPE because they are providing direct medical care and in close contact with the patient for longer periods of time.
In general, only essential personnel should enter the room of patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Healthcare facilities should consider assigning daily cleaning and disinfection of high-touch surfaces to nursing personnel who will already be in the room providing care to the patient.
If this responsibility is assigned to EVS personnel, they should wear all recommended PPE when in the room.
PPE should be removed upon leaving the room, immediately followed by performance of hand hygiene.
After discharge, terminal cleaning can be performed by EVS personnel.
They should delay entry into the room until time has elapsed for enough air changes to remove potentially infectious particles.
After this time has elapsed, EVS personnel can enter the room and should wear a facemask (for source control) along with a gown and gloves when performing terminal cleaning.
Eye protection should be added if splashes or sprays during cleaning and disinfection activities are anticipated or otherwise required based on the selected cleaning products.
Shoe covers are not recommended at this time for personnel caring for patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Some procedures performed on patients are more likely to generate higher concentrations of infectious respiratory aerosols than coughing, sneezing, talking, or breathing.
These aerosol generating procedures (AGPs) potentially put healthcare personnel and others at an increased risk for pathogen exposure and infection.
Development of a comprehensive list of AGPs for healthcare settings has not been possible, due to limitations in available data on which procedures may generate potentially infectious aerosols and the challenges in determining if reported transmissions during AGPs are due to aerosols or other exposures.
There is neither expert consensus, nor sufficient supporting data, to create a definitive and comprehensive list of AGPs for healthcare settings.
Commonly performed medical procedures that are often considered AGPs, or that create uncontrolled respiratory secretions, include:
Based on limited available data, it is uncertain whether aerosols generated from some procedures may be infectious, such as:
*Aerosols generated by nebulizers are derived from medication in the nebulizer.
It is uncertain whether potential associations between performing this common procedure and increased risk of infection might be due to aerosols generated by the procedure or due to increased contact between those administering the nebulized medication and infected patients.
References related to aerosol generating procedures:
Tran K, Cimon K, Severn M, Pessoa-Silva CL, Conly J (2012) Aerosol Generating Procedures and Risk of Transmission of Acute Respiratory Infections to Healthcare Workers: A Systematic Review.
PLoS ONE 7(4); https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3338532/#!po=72.2222external iconexternal iconexternal icon).
Although spread of SARS-CoV-2 is believed to be primarily via respiratory droplets, the contribution of small respirable particles to close proximity transmission is currently uncertain.
Airborne transmission from person-to-person over long distances is unlikely.
The amount of time that the air inside an examination room remains potentially infectious is not known and may depend on a number of factors including the size of the room, the number of air changes per hour, how long the patient was in the room, if the patient was coughing or sneezing, and if an aerosol-generating procedure was performed.
Facilities will need to consider these factors when deciding when the vacated room can be entered by someone who is not wearing PPE.
For a patient who was not coughing or sneezing, did not undergo an aerosol-generating procedure, and occupied the room for a short period of time (e.g a few minutes), any risk to HCP and subsequent patients likely dissipates over a matter of minutes.
However, for a patient who was coughing and remained in the room for a longer period of time or underwent an aerosol-generating procedure, the risk period is likely longer.
For these higher risk scenarios, it is reasonable to apply a similar time period as that used for pathogens spread by the airborne route (e.g measles, tuberculosis) and to restrict HCP and patients without PPE from entering the room until sufficient time has elapsed for enough air changes to remove potentially infectious particles.
General guidance on clearance rates under differing ventilation conditions is available.
In addition to ensuring sufficient time for enough air changes to remove potentially infectious particles, HCP should clean and disinfect environmental surfaces and shared equipment before the room is used for another patient.
CDC has released information about strategies to optimize the supply of isolation gowns.
Healthcare facilities should refer to that guidance and implement the recommended strategies to optimize their current supply of gowns.
This includes shifting toward the use of washable cloth gowns, if feasible.
The use of gowns as part of Contact Precautions in the context of MDROs has been implemented primarily to reduce the risk of transmission to other patients rather than to protect healthcare personnel (HCP).
Facilities with shortages could consider suspending the use of gowns for the care of patients with endemic MDROs, such as MRSA, VRE, and ESBL-producing Gram-negative bacilli except as required for Standard Precautions.
Facilities should assess their local epidemiology to determine which MDROs are considered endemic.
Regardless of the use of gowns, HCP at facilities should continue to wear gloves for contact with these patients and their environment.
Hand hygiene should continue to be emphasized.
Facilities should also attempt to place patients colonized or infected with an MDRO in a private room, if available.
Anyone who had prolonged close contact (within 6 feet for at least 15 minutes) with the infected healthcare provider might have been exposed.
Contact tracing is generally recommended for anyone who had prolonged close contact with the person with COVID-19 during these time periods.
While this question addresses exposure to a potentially infectious provider, the following actions are also recommended if the potentially infectious individual is a patient or visitor.
Recommended actions for HCP, patients, and visitors:
Healthcare facilities should have a process for notifying the health department about known or suspected cases of COVID-19, and should establish a plan, in consultation with local public health authorities, for how exposures in a healthcare facility will be investigated and how contact tracing will be performed.
The plan should address the following:
Contact tracing should be carried out in a way that protects the confidentiality of affected individuals to the extent possible and is consistent with applicable laws and regulations.
HCP and patients who are currently admitted to the facility or were transferred to another healthcare facility should be prioritized for notification.
These groups, if infected, have the potential to expose a large number of individuals at higher risk for severe disease, or in the situation of admitted patients, be at higher risk for severe illness themselves.
Information for health departments about case investigation and contact tracing is available in the Health Departments:  Interim Guidance on Developing a COVID-19 Case Investigation and Contact Tracing Planpdf icon.
This guidance could also be helpful to healthcare facilities performing such activities.
Anyone who had prolonged close contact (within 6 feet for at least 15 minutes) should be considered potentially exposed.
The use of a facemask for source control and adherence to other recommended infection prevention and control (IPC) measures (e.g hand hygiene) by the provider help to reduce the risk of transmission or severe illness.
In areas with moderate to substantial community transmission, patients are already at risk for exposure to SARS-CoV-2 due to exposures outside their home and should be alert to the development of signs or symptoms consistent with COVID-19.
The following should be considered when determining which patients are at higher risk for transmission and might be prioritized for evaluation and testing:
1.
If HCP have a high-risk exposure within 3 months of their initial infection to a patient with SARS-CoV-2 infection, should they be restricted from work for 14 days after the exposure?
CDC has posted guidance addressing risk assessment and work exclusion for HCP with potential exposure to SARS-CoV-2.
Due to their often extensive and close contact with vulnerable individuals, this guidance recommends conservative management of occupationally exposed HCP.
Review of currently available evidence suggests that most individuals do not become re-infected within 3 months of resolution of SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Re-infection has not been definitively identified to date.
Several studies have documented persistent detection of virus using PCR after recovery, some even with redevelopment or new symptoms.
However, people who were newly symptomatic or tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 after recent resolution of an acute infection did not appear to be infectious to others.
Testing of asymptomatic individuals during this 3-month period is complicated by the fact that some people have detectable virus from their prior infection during this period; a positive test during this period may more likely result from a prior infection rather than a new infection that poses risk for transmission.
In light of this, exposed HCP could continue to work, while monitoring for development of symptoms.
If symptoms develop, exposed HCP should be assessed and potentially tested for SARS-Cov-2, if an alternate etiology is not identified.
Some facilities might still choose to institute work exclusion for HCP following a high-risk exposure.
2.
If HCP within 3 months of their initial infection develop symptoms consistent with COVID-19, should they be excluded from work and retested?
HCP within 3 months of a confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection who develop symptoms consistent with COVID-19 should be evaluated to identify potential alternative etiologies for their symptoms.
If an alternate etiology for the symptoms cannot be identified, they may need to be retested for SARS-CoV-2 infection with the understanding that a positive viral test could represent residual viral particles from the previous infection, rather than new infection.
Decisions about the need for and duration of work exclusion should be based upon their suspected diagnosis (e.g influenza, SARS-CoV-2 infection).
3.
Do HCP within 3 months of their initial infection need to wear all recommended personal protective equipment (PPE) when caring for patients with suspected or confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection?
For example, if there are limited respirators, should respirators be prioritized for HCP who have not been previously infected?
Regardless of suspected or confirmed immunity, healthcare personnel should always wear all recommended PPE when caring for patients.
In situations of PPE shortages, facilities should refer to CDC strategies for optimizing PPE supply.
However, as with other infectious diseases (e.g measles), allocation of available PPE should not be based on whether HCP have been previously infected or have evidence of immunity.
4.
Should HCP within 3 months of their initial infection be preferentially assigned to care for patients with suspected or confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection?
While individuals who have recovered from SARS-CoV-2 infection might develop some protective immunity, the duration and extent of such immunity are not known.
Staffing decisions should be based on usual facility practices.
Any HCP assigned to care for patients with suspected or confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection, regardless of history of infection, should follow all recommended infection prevention and control practices when providing care.
Guidance on mitigating staff shortages is also available.
Yes.
HCP who have any kind of exposure for which home quarantine is recommended should be excluded from work:
Home quarantine and work exclusion of asymptomatic exposed HCP who have recovered from SARS-CoV-2 infection in the prior 3 months might not be necessary.
The onset and duration of viral shedding and the period of infectiousness for COVID-19 are not yet known with certainty.
Based on current evidence, scientists believe that persons with mild to moderate COVID-19 may shed replication-competent SARS-CoV-2 for up to 10 days following symptom onset, while a small fraction of persons with severe COVID-19, including immunocompromised persons, may shed replication-competent virus for up to 20 days.
It is possible that SARS-CoV-2 RNA may be detectable in the upper or lower respiratory tract for weeks after illness onset, similar to infections with MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV.
However, detection of viral RNA does not necessarily mean that infectious virus is present.
Based on existing literature, the incubation period (the time from exposure to development of symptoms) of SARS-CoV-2 and other coronaviruses (e.g MERS-CoV, SARS-CoV) ranges from 2–14 days.
SARS-CoV-2 RNA has been detected in upper and lower respiratory tract specimens, and SARS-CoV-2 virus has been isolated from upper respiratory tract specimens and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid.
SARS-CoV-2 RNA has been detected in blood and stool specimens, and SARS-CoV-2 virus has been isolated in cell culture from the stool of some patients, including a patient with pneumonia 15 days after symptom onset.
The duration of SARS-CoV-2 RNA detection in upper and lower respiratory tract specimens and in extrapulmonary specimens is not yet known but may be several weeks or longer.
Duration of several weeks or longer has been observed in cases of MERS-CoV or SARS-CoV infection.
While viable, infectious SARS-CoV has been isolated from respiratory, blood, urine, and stool specimens, viable, infectious MERS-CoV has only been isolated from respiratory tract specimens.
It is not yet known whether other non-respiratory body fluids from an infected person including blood, vomit, urine, breast milk, or semen can contain viable, infectious SARS-CoV-2.
The immune response, including duration of immunity, to SARS-CoV-2 infection is not yet understood.
Patients infected with other betacoronaviruses (MERS-CoV, HCoV-OC43), the genus to which SARS-CoV-2 belongs, are unlikely to be re-infected shortly (e.g 3 months or more) after they recover.
However, more information is needed to know whether similar immune protection will be observed for patients with COVID-19.
Yes.
There are commercially developed respiratory panels with multi-pathogen molecular assays that can detect respiratory pathogens, including SARS-CoV-2, influenza, and other human coronaviruses that can cause acute respiratory illness.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) maintains a list of tests that includes viral tests with Emergency Use Authorizationexternal icon (EUA).
Patients can be infected with more than one virus at the same time.
Coinfections with other respiratory viruses in people with COVID-19 have been reported.
Therefore, identifying infection with one respiratory virus does not exclude SARS-CoV-2 virus infection.
Clinicians considering use of chest CT scans for diagnosis or management of COVID-19 patients should consider whether such imaging will change clinical management.
The American College of Radiology (ACR) recommends that CT should not be used to screen for COVID-19, or as a first-line test to diagnose COVID-19, and that CT should be used sparingly and reserved for hospitalized, symptomatic patients with specific clinical indications for CT.
Appropriate infection control procedures should be followed before scanning subsequent patients.
For more information see, ACR Recommendations for the use of Chest Radiography and Computed Tomography (CT) for Suspected COVID-19 Infectionexternal iconexternal icon.
Healthcare providers should immediately notify infection control personnel at their facility if they suspect COVID-19 in a patient.
If a patient tests positive, providers should report that positive result to their local/state health department.
Patients with MIS-C have presented with a persistent fever and a variety of signs and symptoms including multiorgan (e.g cardiac, gastrointestinal, renal, hematologic, dermatologic, neurologic) involvement and elevated inflammatory markers.
Not all children will have the same symptoms.
For children who may have MIS-C, further evaluation for signs of this syndrome may include (but are not limited to) chest radiograph, echocardiography, and blood testing to evaluate for evidence of inflammation.
Healthcare providers who have cared or are caring for patients younger than 21 years of age meeting MIS-C criteria should report suspected cases to their local, state, or territorial health department.
After hour phone numbers for health departments are available at the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists website.external icon  For additional reporting questions, please contact CDCs 24-hour Emergency Operations Center at 770-488-7100.
For more information, including a full case definition, please visit MIS-C Information for Healthcare Providers.
The answer to this question depends on: 1) how much time has passed since the initial illness onset; and 2) whether the individual has developed symptoms after an initial period of recovery.
This guidance may be updated as we learn more information on how long SARS-CoV-2 may persist and risks for reinfection.
Yes.
To determine if residents and HCP have a current infection, they should have a viral test (e.g reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction RT-PCR) regardless of their antibody test result.
A positive antibody test result shows that an individual has antibodies from an infection with the virus that causes COVID-19, or possibly from infection with a related virus from the same family of viruses (called coronavirus), such as one that causes the common cold.
We do not know yet if having antibodies to the virus that causes COVID-19 can protect someone from getting infected again or, if they do, how long this protection might last.
Therefore, antibody tests should not be used to diagnose COVID-19 and should not be used to inform infection prevention actions.
Residents, or their medical powers of attorney, have the right to decline testing.
Clinical discussions about testing may include alternative specimen collection sources that may be more acceptable to residents than nasopharyngeal swabs (e.g anterior nares).
Providing information about the method of testing and reason for pursuing testing may facilitate discussions with residents and their medical powers of attorney.
If a resident has symptoms consistent with COVID-19, but declines testing, they should remain on Transmission-Based Precautions until they meet the symptom-based criteria for discontinuation.
If a resident is asymptomatic and declines testing at the time of facility-wide testing, decisions on placing the resident on Transmission-Based Precautions for COVID-19 or providing usual care should be based on whether the facility has evidence suggesting SARS-CoV-2 transmission (i.e confirmed infection in HCP or nursing-home onset infection in a resident).
Only residents who have a confirmed positive viral test should be moved to COVID-19-designated units or facilities.
If HCP with symptoms consistent with COVID-19 decline testing, they should be presumed to have COVID-19 and excluded from work.
Return to work decisions should be based on COVID-19 return to work guidance at the discretion of the facilitys occupational health program.
If asymptomatic HCP decline testing, work restriction, if any, should be determined by the facilitys occupational health and local jurisdiction policies.
All staff should be trained in proper use of personal protective equipment, including universal facemask policies, hand hygiene, and other measures needed to stop transmission of SARS-CoV-2.
No, HCP do not need to be tested at each facility.
If documentation of the test result is provided to each facility, the results from one setting are adequate to meet the testing recommendations at any facility.
Each facility should maintain appropriate documentation of test results and have a plan to evaluate and manage HCP.
HCP should be encouraged to tell facilities if they have had exposures at other facilities with recognized COVID-19 cases.
Serial testing of HCP in nursing homes is indicated in two situations: when there is a COVID-19 outbreak in the facility and as part of the reopening process.
If there is a COVID-19 outbreak in the facility, all previously negative residents and HCP should be serially tested until the testing identifies no new cases of COVID-19 among residents or HCP over at least 14 days since the most recent positive result.
As part of the reopening processexternal iconexternal icon, the decision to serially test HCP for SARS-CoV-2 should be made in the context of local incidence.
Depending on the level of community transmission, HCP could continue to be at risk for acquiring infection in the community and introducing it to residents of nursing homes.
Health departments should have a plan on how to prioritize facilities when testing capacity is limited.
Priority facilities may include those with confirmed cases, those in counties with high incidence, those with the ability to cohort residents who are found to be positive, larger facilities, and facilities with more patients with recent healthcare exposures (e.g recent hospitalization or outpatient dialysis).
If a facility identifies additional cases through facility-wide testing, then that facility should be prioritized for repeat testing of negative residents.
If HCP remain asymptomatic, they may continue working while awaiting test results, unless work restrictions have been implemented by the occupational health program because of an exposure warranting exclusion from work.
There is currently no FDA-approved post-exposure prophylaxis for people who may have been exposed to COVID-19.
For information about registered clinical trials of investigational therapeutics for pre- or post-exposure prophylaxis of SARS-CoV-2 infection, visit ClinicalTrials.govexternal icon.
For more information on movement restrictions, monitoring for symptoms, and evaluation after possible exposure to COVID-19, see Interim US Guidance for Risk Assessment and Public Health Management of Persons with Potential Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Exposure in Travel-associated or Community Settings and Interim U.S Guidance for Risk Assessment and Public Health Management of Healthcare Personnel with Potential Exposure in a Healthcare Setting to Patients with Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
The National Institutes of Health recently published guidelines on prophylaxis use for COVID-19 and testing and management of COVID-19 patients.
For more information, please visit: National Institutes of Health: Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Treatment Guidelinesexternal icon.
Not all patients with COVID-19 will require medical supportive care.
Clinical management for hospitalized patients with COVID-19 is focused on supportive care for complications, including supplemental oxygen and advanced organ support for respiratory failure, septic shock, and multi-organ failure.
Empiric testing and treatment for other viral or bacterial etiologies may be warranted.
The National Institutes of Health has published interim guidelines for the medical management of COVID-19external icon prepared by the COVID-19 Treatment Guidelines Panel.
For information on investigational therapies, see Therapeutic Options for Patients with COVID-19.
Not all patients with COVID-19 require hospital admission.
Patients whose clinical presentation warrants in-patient clinical management for supportive medical care should be admitted to the hospital under appropriate Transmission-Based Precautions.
Some patients with initial mild clinical presentation may worsen in the second week of illness.
The decision to monitor these patients in the inpatient or outpatient setting should be made on a case-by-case basis.
This decision will depend not only on the clinical presentation, but also on the patients ability to engage in self-monitoring, the feasibility of safe isolation at home, and the risk of transmission in the patients home environment.
For more information, see Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Suspected or Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in a Healthcare Setting and Interim Guidance for Implementing Home Care of People Not Requiring Hospitalization for Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
References related to hospitalization and outcomes among patients with COVID-19:
Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, et al.
Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China.
Lancet 2020;395:497-506.
Wang D, Hu B, Hu C, et al.
Clinical Characteristics of 138 Hospitalized Patients With 2019 Novel Coronavirus-Infected Pneumonia in Wuhan, China.
JAMA 2020.
Dong Y, Mo X, Hu Y, et al.
Epidemiology of COVID-19 Among Children in China.
Pediatrics 2020.
Wu Z, McGoogan JM.
Characteristics of and Important Lessons From the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Outbreak in China: Summary of a Report of 72 314 Cases From the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention.
JAMA 2020.
Patients can be discharged from the healthcare facility whenever clinically indicated.
Meeting criteria for discontinuation of Transmission-Based Precautions is not a prerequisite for discharge from a healthcare facility.
Isolation should be maintained at home if the patient returns home before the time period recommended for discontinuation of hospital Transmission-Based Precautions.
Decisions to discontinue Transmission-Based Precautions or in-home isolation should be made according to the following guidance:
Many recovered persons do not have detectable SARS-CoV-2 RNA in upper respiratory tract specimens.
However, viral RNA can be persistently detected by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) in respiratory tract samples in some persons after apparent clinical recovery.
In some persons, after testing negative by RT-PCR in two consecutive samples, later samples can test positive again.
These persistent detections of viral RNA usually are associated with higher cycle threshold (Ct) values (i.e fewer RNA copies) than Ct values found in RT-PCR results from samples collected shortly before or during clinical illness.
Studies that have examined how long SARS-CoV-2 RNA can be detected in adults have demonstrated that, in some persons, it can be detected for weeks.
Whether the presence of detectable but low concentrations of viral RNA after clinical recovery represents the presence of potentially infectious virus is unknown.
Based on experience with other viruses, it is unlikely that such persons pose an important infectious risk to others.
However, whether this is true for SARS-CoV-2 infection has not been definitively established.
After the onset of illness, the detectable viral burden usually declines.
After a week or more, anti-SARS-CoV-2 immunoglobulin becomes detectable and then antibody levels increase.
Some of these antibodies may prevent the virus from infecting cells in cell culture.
A decline in viral RNA is associated with a decreased ability to isolate live virus.
For most patients with COVID-19, efforts to isolate live virus from upper respiratory tract specimens have been unsuccessful when specimens are collected more than 10 days after illness onset.
Recovery of live virus between 10 and 20 days after symptom onset has been documented in some persons with severe COVID-19; in some cases, these persons were in an immunocompromised state.
Persons who have tested persistently or recurrently positive for SARS-CoV-2 RNA have, in some cases, had their signs and symptoms of COVID-19 improve.
When viral isolation in tissue culture has been attempted in such persons in South Korea and the United States, live virus has not been isolated.
There is no evidence to date that clinically recovered persons with persistent or recurrent detection of viral RNA have transmitted SARS-CoV-2 to others.
Despite these observations, its not possible to conclude that all persons with persistent or recurrent detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA are no longer infectious.
There is no firm evidence that the antibodies that develop in response to SARS-CoV-2 infection are protective.
If these antibodies are protective, its not known what antibody levels are needed to  protect against reinfection.
These data and experience with other viral respiratory infections indicate that most persons recovered from COVID-19 who test persistently or recurrently positive by RT-PCR are likely no longer infectious.
Isolation and precautions may be discontinued for persons with COVID-19  10 days after symptom onset (the date on which symptoms first began, including non-respiratory symptoms), provided their fever has resolved for at least 24 hours, without the use of fever-reducing medications, and their other symptoms have improved.
For some persons with severe or critical illness, or who are severely immunocompromised, isolation and precautions may be maintained for up to 20 days after symptom onset.
No.
Although attempts to culture virus from upper respiratory specimens have been largely unsuccessful when Ct values are in high but detectable ranges, Ct values are not a quantitative measure of viral burden.
In addition, Ct values are not standardized by RT-PCR platform nor have they been approved by FDA for use in clinical management.
CDC does not endorse or recommend use of Ct values to assess when a person is no longer infectious.
However, serial Ct values may be useful in the context of the entire body of information available when assessing recovery and resolution of infection.
Prospectively collecting serial respiratory samples and attempting to isolate live virus in tissue culture from multiple persons testing positive by RT-PCR following illness recovery is needed.
If repeated attempts to recover replication-competent virus in culture from such serial samples are unsuccessful, that data would be sufficient evidence that infectious virus is absent.
Then we would be sure that persons continuing to test positive do not pose an infectious risk to others.
Yes.
However, viral culture is not widely performed for SARS-CoV-2.
It must be conducted in Biosafety Level 3 (BSL-3) laboratories using BSL-3 practices by experienced virologists and culture results can take a week or more.
Therefore, while persons whose specimens do not yield live virus are considered no longer infectious, the complexity of such testing and the time required to complete it mean that culture cannot be used routinely to guide management of infected persons.
For persons who remain asymptomatic following recovery from COVID-19, retesting (e.g as part of a contact tracing investigation) is not necessary during the first 3 months after the date of symptom onset.
When a positive test occurs less than 3 months after the persons symptom onset of their most recent illness, it is possible that the positive test represents a new infection or a persistently positive test associated with the previous infection.
If a positive test occurs more than 3 months after a persons symptom onset, clinicians and public health authorities should consider the possibility of reinfection.
Until we have more information, the determination of whether a patient with a positive test in these situations is contagious to others should be made on a case-by-case basis.
Consider consultation with infectious diseases specialists and public health authorities to review all available information (e.g medical history, time from initial positive test, RT-PCR Ct values, and presence of COVID-19 signs or symptoms).
Persons who are determined to be potentially infectious should undergo evaluation and remain isolated until they again meet criteria for discontinuation of isolation or discontinuation of transmission-based precautions, depending on their circumstances.
Persons who develop new symptoms consistent with COVID-19 more than 3 months after the date of symptom onset of the most recent illness episode should be retested.
Persons with recurrent symptoms after the first 3 months who test positive should be considered infectious and remain isolated until they again meet criteria for discontinuation of isolation or of transmission-based precautions.
Contact tracing during the persons second period of symptoms is warranted.
For persons who develop new symptoms consistent with COVID-19 during the first 3 months since the date of symptom onset of the most recent illness episode, retesting may be warranted if alternative etiologies for the illness cannot be identified.
If reinfection is suspected, repeat isolation and contact tracing may be needed.
The determination of whether a patient with a subsequently positive test is contagious to others should be made on a case-by-case basis, in consultation with infectious diseases specialists and public health authorities, after review of available information (e.g medical history, time from initial positive test, RT-PCR Ct values, and presence of COVID-19 signs or symptoms).
A person who has clinically recovered from COVID-19 and then is identified as a contact of a new case within 3 months of symptom onset of their most recent illness does not need to be quarantined or retested for SARS-CoV-2.
However, if a person is identified as a contact of a new case 3 months or more after symptom onset, they should follow quarantine recommendations for contacts.
No.
The symptom-based strategy is intended to replace the need for repeated testing.
Yes.
It is recommended that all persons, with a few exceptions, wear cloth face coverings in public.1 The primary purpose of cloth face coverings is to limit transmission of SARS-CoV-2 from infected persons who may be infectious but do not have clinical symptoms of illness or may have early or mild symptoms that they do not recognize.
Cloth face coverings may provide reassurance to others in public settings and be a reminder of the need to maintain social distancing.
However, cloth face coverings are not personal protective equipment (PPE) and should not be used instead of a respirator or a facemask to protect a healthcare worker.
1 Cloth face coverings should not be placed on young children under age 2, anyone who has trouble breathing, or anyone who is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
When available, respirators (or facemasks if a respirator is not available), eye protection, gloves, and gowns should be used for the care of patients with known or suspected COVID-19 infection, including women who are pregnant.
For more information, please see Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Suspected or Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Healthcare Settings.
During respirator shortages, care should be taken to ensure that N95 respirators are reserved for situations where respiratory protection is most important, such as performance of aerosol-generating procedures on patients with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 infection.
In such shortage situations, facemasks might be used for other types of patient care.
Alternatives to N95 respirators might be considered where feasible.
These include other classes of NIOSH-approved filtering facepiece respirators, half facepiece or full facepiece elastomeric respirators, and powered air-purifying respirators (PAPRs) where feasible.
All of these alternatives will provide equivalent or higher protection than N95 respirators when properly worn.
However, PAPRs and elastomeric respirators should not be used in surgical settings due to concerns that exhaled air may contaminate the sterile field.
For more information please see: Strategies for Optimizing the Supply of N95 Respirators: Conventional Capacity Strategies.
When respirator supplies are restored, the facility can switch back to use of N95 respirators for all care of patients with known or suspected COVID-19 infection.
For more information, please see Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Suspected or Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Healthcare Settings.
Based on limited data, forceful exhalation during the second stage of labor would not be expected to generate aerosols to the same extent as procedures more commonly considered to be aerosol generating (such as bronchoscopy, intubation, and open suctioning.
Forceful exhalation during the second stage of labor is not considered an aerosol-generating procedure for respirator prioritization during shortages over procedures more likely to generate higher concentrations of infectious respiratory aerosols.
When respirator supplies are restored, as with all clinical care activities for patients with known or suspected COVID-19, HCP should use respirators (or facemasks if a respirator is not available), eye protection, gloves, and gowns during the second stage of labor, in addition to other personal protective equipment that may be typically indicated for labor and delivery.
For more information please see: Healthcare Infection Prevention and Control FAQs
Based on limited data, high-flow oxygen use is not considered an aerosol-generating procedure for respirator prioritization during shortages over procedures more likely to generate higher concentrations of infectious respiratory aerosols (such as bronchoscopy, intubation, and open suctioning).
Patients with known or suspected COVID-19 should receive any interventions they would normally receive as standard of care.
When respirator supplies are restored, as with all clinical care activities for patients with known or suspected COVID-19, respirators (or facemasks if a respirator is not available), eye protection, gloves, and gowns should be used by HCP for the care of pregnant patients with known or suspected COVID-19.
For more information please see: Healthcare Infection Prevention and Control FAQs
Clinicians should use their judgment to determine if a patient has signs and symptoms compatible with COVID-19 and whether the patient should be tested.
Fever is the most commonly reported sign; most patients with confirmed COVID-19 have developed fever and/or symptoms of acute respiratory illness (cough, difficulty breathing).
Data regarding COVID-19 in pregnancy are limited; according to current information, presenting signs and symptoms are expected to be similar to those for non-pregnant patients, including the presence of fever.
Other considerations that may guide testing are epidemiologic factors such as the occurrence of local community transmission of COVID-19 infections.
As part of evaluation, clinicians are strongly encouraged to test for other causes of respiratory illness and peripartum fever.
For more information please see: Testing Overview for Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)
HCP in labor and delivery healthcare settings should follow the same infection prevention and control recommendations and personal protective equipment recommendations as all other HCP.
If HCP are exposed to patients with COVID-19 infection, guidance is available for HCP and healthcare facilities on steps to take.
For more information, please see: Interim U.S.
Guidance for Risk Assessment and Public Health Management of Healthcare Personnel with Potential Exposure in a Healthcare Setting to Patients with Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19)
Several patients with COVID-19 have been reported to present with concurrent community-acquired bacterial pneumonia.
Decisions to administer antibiotics to COVID-19 patients should be based on the likelihood of bacterial infection (community-acquired or hospital-acquired), illness severity, and antimicrobial stewardship issues.
For more information, see Diagnosis and Treatment of Adults with Community-acquired Pneumonia: An Official Clinical Practice Guideline of the American Thoracic Society and Infectious Diseases Society of Americaexternal iconexternal icon.
There are currently no antiviral drugs approved by FDA to treat COVID-19.
See Interim Clinical Guidance for Management of Patients with Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
CDC is currently not aware of scientific evidence establishing a link between NSAIDs (e.g ibuprofen, naproxen) and worsening of COVID‑19.
FDAexternal iconexternal icon, the European Medicines Agencyexternal icon, the World Health Organization, and CDC are continuing to monitor the situation and will review new information on the effects of NSAIDs and COVID-19 disease as it becomes available.
For those who wish to use treatment options other than NSAIDs, there are other over-the-counter and prescription medications approved for pain relief and fever reduction.
Patients who rely on NSAIDs to treat chronic conditions and have additional questions should speak to their healthcare provider for individualized management.
Patients should use NSAIDs, and all medications, according to the product labels and advice of their healthcare professional.
People with moderate to severe asthma, particularly if not well controlled, might be at higher risk of getting very sick from COVID-19.
Based on what we currently know about COVID-19, the selection of therapeutic options through guideline-recommended treatment of asthma has not been affected.
National asthma guidelinesexternal icon are available.
Continuation of inhaled corticosteroids is particularly important for patients already using these medications because there is no evidence of increased risk of COVID-19 morbidity with use of inhaled corticosteroids and an abundance of data showing reduced risk of asthma exacerbation with maintenance of asthma controller therapy.
Patients with asthma but without symptoms or a diagnosis of COVID-19 should continue any required nebulizer treatments.
Selection of therapeutic options through guideline-recommended treatment of asthma exacerbations has not been affected by what we currently know about COVID-19.
Systemic corticosteroids should be used to treat an asthma exacerbation per national asthma guidelinesexternal icon and current standards of care, even if it is caused by COVID-19.
Short-term use of systemic corticosteroids to treat asthma exacerbations should be continued.
There is currently no evidence to suggest that short-term use of systemic corticosteroids to treat asthma exacerbations increases the risk of developing severe COVID-19, whereas there is an abundance of data to support use of systemic steroids for moderate or severe asthma exacerbations.
Patients with asthma but without symptoms or a diagnosis of COVID-19 should continue any required nebulizer for treatments, as recommended by national professional organizations, including the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma &amp; Immunology (AAAAI) and the American College of Allergy, Asthma &amp; Immunology (ACAAI).
If healthcare providers need to be present during nebulizer use among patients who have either symptoms or a diagnosis of COVID-19, use CDCs recommended precautions when performing aerosol-generating procedures (AGPs).
Clinicians may be concerned that an asthma exacerbation is related to an underlying infection with COVID-19.
Clinicians can access laboratory testing for COVID-19 through a network of state and local public health laboratories across the country.
Lists of states and territories with laboratories that are using COVID-19 viral tests are available.
For more information, see Testing in U.S. Clinicians should direct testing questions to their state and localexternal icon health departments.
Patients can be referred to CDCs recommendations for caring for themselves or someone else at home sick with COVID-19.
If nebulizer use at home is necessary for patients with asthma who have symptoms or a diagnosis of COVID-19, use of the nebulizer in a location that minimizes and preferably avoids exposure to any other members of the household, and preferably a location where air is not recirculated into the home (like a porch, patio, or garage) is recommended by national professional organizations, including the American College of Allergy, Asthma &amp; Immunology (ACAAI) by the ACAAI and the Allergy &amp; Asthma Network (AAN).
Limiting the number of people in the room or location where the nebulizer is used is also recommended by the Asthma &amp; Allergy Foundation of America (AAFA).
Nebulizers should be used and cleaned according to the manufacturers instructions.
If nebulizer use in a healthcare setting is necessary for patients who have either symptoms or a diagnosis of COVID-19, use CDCs recommended precautions when performing aerosol-generating procedures (AGPs).
Yes, for your COVID-19 patients with risk factors for viral hepatitis and elevated hepatic enzymes, consider testing them for hepatitis A virus, hepatitis B virus, and hepatitis C virus infections.
However, elevated alanine aminotransferase (ALT) or aspartate aminotransferase (AST) may also be associated with COVID-19 alone and indicate greater severity of illness.
For more information, review CDCs Interim Clinical Guidance for Management of Patients with Confirmed Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19)
Yes.
People susceptible to hepatitis A virus (HAV) infection during the current hepatitis A outbreaks should receive the hepatitis A vaccine when possible.
This includes:
Vaccination in settings such as jails, other correctional facilities, and homeless shelters should continue if already previously planned and organized in a way that would adhere to infection control practices and where relevant social distancing standards can be maintained.
However, efforts should be made to vaccinate people in non-congregate settings that allow for social distancing.
Whenever possible, vaccination efforts in non-congregate settings should continue for people at highest risk of acquiring HAV infection or developing serious complications from HAV infection, if social distancing standards can be maintained.
Routine hepatitis A and hepatitis B vaccination of children should continue to the extent possible, according to the CDC immunization schedules.
Maintaining Childhood Immunizations During COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic is changing rapidly and continues to affect communities across the United States differently.
Some of the strategies used to slow the spread of disease in communities include postponing or cancelling non-urgent elective procedures and using telemedicine instead of face-to-face encounters for routine medical visits.
Different strategies are needed to ensure the delivery of newborn care and well-child care, including childhood immunizations.
Healthcare providers in communities affected by COVID-19 are using strategies to separate well visits from sick visitsexternal icon.
Examples include:
Because of personal, practice, or community circumstances related to COVID-19, some providers may not be able to provide well-child care, including immunizations, for all patients in their practice.
If a practice can provide only limited well-child visits, healthcare providers are encouraged to prioritize newborn care and vaccination of infants and young children (through 24 months of age) when possible.
CDC is monitoring the situation and will continue to provide guidance.
Yes.
Hepatitis B vaccination of all infants, especially those exposed to hepatitis B virus, should occur according to the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) recommendations.
Yes.
Management should continue to prevent mother-to-child transmission of hepatitis B.
Pediatric Care of HBV-exposed Infants
Yes.
Continue to administer these vaccines if an in-person visit must be scheduled for some other purpose and the clinical preventive service can be delivered during that visit with no additional risk; or an individual patient and their clinician believe that there is a compelling need to receive the service based on an assessment that the potential benefit outweighs the risk of exposure to SARS-CoV-2 virus.
For more information see Delivery of Adult Clinical Preventive Services, Including Immunizations.
Many patients with severe illness from COVID-19 have underlying hypertension.1 Hypertension is common in the United States.
Hypertension is more frequent with advancing age and among non-Hispanic blacks and people with other underlying medical conditions such as obesity and diabetes.
At this time, people whose only underlying medical condition is hypertension might be at increased risk  for severe illness from COVID-19.2
No.
The American Heart Association, the Heart Failure Society of America, and the American College of Cardiology recommendexternal icon continuing ACE-I or ARB medications for all patients already prescribed those medications for indications such as heart failure, hypertension, or ischemic heart disease.
At this time, available evidence demonstrates no indication of COVID-specific harm from these agents.
Several randomized controlled trials are under way to better answer this important clinical question.
Cardiovascular disease patients diagnosed with COVID-19 should be fully evaluated by a healthcare professional before adding or removing any treatments, and any changes to their treatment should be based on the latest scientific evidence.
Patients who rely on ACE-Is or ARBs to treat chronic conditions and have additional questions should speak to their healthcare provider for individualized management
Waste generated in the care of PUIs or patients with confirmed COVID-19 does not present additional considerations for wastewater disinfection in the United States.
Coronaviruses are susceptible to the same disinfection conditions in community and healthcare settings as other viruses, so current disinfection conditions in wastewater treatment facilities are expected to be sufficient.
This includes conditions for practices such as oxidation with hypochlorite (i.e chlorine bleach) and peracetic acid, as well as inactivation using UV irradiation.
Wastewater workers should use standard practices including basic hygiene precautions and wear the recommended PPE as prescribed for their current work tasks when handling untreated waste.
There is no evidence to suggest that employees of wastewater plants need any additional protections in relation to COVID-19.
Medical waste (trash) coming from healthcare facilities treating COVID-2019 patients is no different than waste coming from facilities without COVID-19 patients.
CDCs guidance states that management of laundry, food service utensils, and medical waste should be performed in accordance with routine procedures.
There is no evidence to suggest that facility waste needs any additional disinfection.
More guidance about environmental infection control is available in section 7 of CDCs Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Confirmed COVID-19 or Persons Under Investigation for COVID-19 in Healthcare Settings.
Guidance About Preventing COVID-19 Infections in Diverse Settings
CDC is supporting this critical work by providing guidance for:
Content describing non-CDC tools on this site is provided for informational purposes only and is not intended to indicate endorsement, actual or implied, of the tools.
Additionally, information on this site is provided as is, for users to evaluate and make their own determination as to their effectiveness.
Several other federal agencies are also supporting this critical effort by providing resources:
Various other organizations are also supporting this critical effort by providing training and other resources:
Search for specific COVID-19 guidance across CDC web pages and documents
The Latest in COVID-19 Data and Surveillance
For surveillance of COVID-19 and its cause, SARS-CoV-2, in the United States, CDC is using multiple surveillance systems run in collaboration with state, local and territorial health departments, public health, commercial and clinical laboratories, vital statistics offices, health care providers, emergency departments and academic partners to monitor COVID-19 disease in the United States.
National COVID-19 reporting: CDC works with state and territorial public health partners to coordinate COVID-19 case reporting nationally.
Content describing non-CDC tools on this site is provided for informational purposes only and is not intended to indicate endorsement, actual or implied, of the tools.
Additionally, information on this site is provided as is, for users to evaluate and make their own determination as to their effectiveness.
Various other organizations are also supporting this critical effort by providing:
Search for specific COVID-19 guidance across CDC web pages and documents
Guidance and Resources for Laboratories
Resources for laboratories to conduct testing to identify new cases of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
CDC is supporting this critical work by providing:
Content describing non-CDC tools on this site is provided for informational purposes only and is not intended to indicate endorsement, actual or implied, of the tools.
Additionally, information on this site is provided as is, for users to evaluate and make their own determination as to their effectiveness.
Several other federal agencies support this critical effort by providing:
Various other organizations are also supporting this critical effort by providing:
Search for specific COVID-19 guidance across CDC web pages and documents
Get and Keep America Open: Supporting states, tribes, localities, and territories
Community Mitigation Resources
Investigating Cases in Homeless Shelters
State Public Health Vets &amp; Animal Health Officials
Environmental Health Practitioners
Approach for Monitoring and Evaluating Community Mitigation Strategies
Investigating &amp; Responding to Cases in Non-Healthcare Work Settings
Prioritizing Non-Healthcare Worksite Assessments
Manufacturing Facility Assessment Toolkit
Find quick links to mitigation guidance for sectors all in one place.
As well as links to setting-specific assessment tools to help with putting guidance into practice.pdf icon3 pages
Search for specific COVID-19 guidance across CDC web pages and documents
CDC is using a multi-pronged approach to help enhance and complement the efforts of state, tribal, local, and territorial staff.
This initiative will help health departments with the staffing resources they need for their programs to get and keep America open.
*These numbers reflect data from September 11, 2020 – number of staff can change daily.
This map shows CDC deployments and CDC field staff.
A total of 664 CDC staff are currently working in state, tribal, local, and territorial health agencies.
Six staff are deployed to support Navajo Nation, six staff are deployed with the Muscogee Tribe (not shown on map), five staff are deployed with the Northern Cheyenne Tribe (not shown on map), three staff are deployed with the Hoopa Tribe (not shown on map), three staff are deployed with the Tohono Oodham Tribe (not shown on map), two staff are deployed with the Crow Tribe (not shown on map), two staff are deployed with the Paiute-Shoshone Tribe (not shown on map), two staff are deployed with the Shawnee Tribe (not shown on map), one staff is deployed with the Hopi Tribe (not shown on map), one staff is deployed with the Rosebud Tribe (not shown on map), one staff is deployed with the San Carlos Apache Tribe (not shown on map), and one staff is deployed with the Yavapai Tribe (not shown on map).
These charts show CDC field team deployments and quarantine station deployments by date.
These charts are updated weekly and reflect data from September 9, 2020.
Content describing non-CDC tools on this site is provided for informational purposes only and is not intended to indicate endorsement, actual or implied, of the tools.
Additionally, information on this site is provided as is, for users to evaluate and make their own determination as to their effectiveness.
Various other organizations are also supporting this critical effort by providing volunteer and paid staff.
Search for specific COVID-19 guidance across CDC web pages and documents
Get and Keep America Open: Supporting states, tribes, localities, and territories
Federal fiscal resources for CDC applicants and recipients.
Visit Grants.gov to search for COVID-19 related federal funding announcements.external icon
CDC is supporting the critical work by providing funding and guidance.
Content describing non-CDC tools on this site is provided for informational purposes only and is not intended to indicate endorsement, actual or implied, of the tools.
Additionally, information on this site is provided as is, for users to evaluate and make their own determination as to their effectiveness.
Several other federal agencies are also supporting this critical effort by providing:
Search for specific COVID-19 guidance across CDC web pages and documents
Communication Tools and Resources Available for Use and Distribution
Audience: Public Information Officers (PIOs) and other health department and public health professionals
Talking points, sample public service announcements, social media, graphics, and more to help health departments communicate with the public about COVID-19 contact tracing and why it is important.
Crisis &amp; Emergency Communication (CERC) includes free and downloadable resources to help prepare communication plans for use during a crisis.
Learn more
State, tribal, local, and territorial (STLT) public health departments can access free CDC tools and resources, including design templates, matte articles, podcasts, medical illustrations, and videos.
Registration is required.
Learn more
This toolkit helps the user localize COVID-19 social media messaging.
Videos, social media, PSAs, print resources, checklists, FAQs, and web resources for a variety of audiences.
A collection of COVID-19 media resources.
Real-time COVID-19 information added to your website.
Español
Search for topic-specific guidance documents
Content describing non-CDC tools on this site is provided for informational purposes only and is not intended to indicate endorsement, actual or implied, of the tools.
Additionally, information on this site is provided as is, for users to evaluate and make their own determination as to their effectiveness.
Various other organizations are also supporting this critical effort by providing:
Get and Keep America Open: Supporting states, tribes, localities, and territories 
CDC is using a multi-pronged approach to help enhance and complement the efforts of state, tribal, local, and territorial (STLT) staff through innovative hiring mechanisms designed to address the surge staffing needs of health departments.
This CDC initiative will help provide access to a variety of mechanisms to complement local efforts to increase capacity.
Search for specific COVID-19 guidance across CDC web pages and documents
 Considerations for state and local health departments
Revisions were made on June 19, 2020 to reflect the following:
Purpose: Homeless service provider sites can present unique challenges for COVID-19 case investigation and public health action.
Because these sites can be crowded settings, the virus may spread easily among clients, staff, and volunteers.
Additionally, clients at homeless service provider sites are often older adults or have underlying medical conditions, increasing their likelihood of severe illness from COVID-19.
To help homeless service providers prevent the spread of COVID-19, review the CDC guidance specific to homeless service providers and related to people experiencing unsheltered homelessness.
The following guidance outlines public health actions to take when a client with COVID-19 is identified.
Homeless service provider sites have many different designs and capacities.
Some may have individual apartments or rooms, while others use shared sleeping areas.
Some have medical staff on site, while others do not.
The investigation, support needed, and public health actions to be taken will depend on the setting and the local context of the outbreak.
Gather information from the homeless service site and consider the following options when responding to cases or clusters of COVID-19 in homeless service provider sites.
CDC guidance for COVID-19 may be adapted by state and local health departments to respond to rapidly changing local circumstances.
This document was updated to reflect the updates in the Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Suspected or Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Healthcare Settings.
CDC provides guidance on what specimens to collect when testing for COVID-19.
The latest guidance is available online at Evaluating and Testing Persons for Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
As part of the risk assessment and public health management of persons with potential COVID-19, public health personnel will typically conduct interviews and assess these individuals for fever or other symptoms of COVID-19.
In certain circumstances they will also obtain respiratory specimens.
This guidance is intended to address recommended infection prevention and control practices when these activities are performed at a home or non-home residential settings, which warrant additional considerations beyond those described for healthcare settings.
For recommendations on the evaluation of PUIs in healthcare settings refer to the Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Suspected or Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Healthcare Settings.
Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) is a disease caused by the newly emerged coronavirus SARS-CoV-2.
The COVID-19 Case Report Formpdf icon collects key information on COVID-19 case-patients, including:
CDC developed the case report form to standardize the reporting of information on COVID-19 cases.
These data will help us:
Here are two additional resources to help reporting jurisdiction health departments complete the case report form:
Please note that the form, instructions, and data dictionary were updated on May 5, 2020.
CDC previously collected information on persons under investigation and cases of COVID-19 (using the same form).
We no longer collect information on persons under investigation.
The only exception to this is if jurisdictions do not have the capacity to do their own testing and are sending specimens to CDC.
Healthcare providers who are concerned that a patient may have COVID-19 and want to report a case should contact their localexternal icon or stateexternal icon health department immediately.
The jurisdiction should enter cases into CDCs electronic reporting system with the jurisdiction-issued nCoV ID, unless other arrangements to transmit data have been approved by CDC.
This document provides supplemental guidance regarding specimen collection, storage, and shippingpdf icon to CDC laboratories.
This is in addition to CDCs guidelines for COVID-19 clinical specimens.
CDC has separate guidance for exposures in healthcare settings and U.S. communities, and for critical infrastructure workers.
The COVID-19 pandemic has spread in all regions internationally as well as throughout the United States.
Individuals who travel internationally, or domestically outside of their communities, may be at risk for exposure to SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, before, during, or after travel, and could spread the virus to others at their travel destination or upon returning to their home community.
As part of a broader strategy aimed to limit continued new introduction of COVID-19 into US communities, all travelers should remain vigilant for signs and symptoms suggestive of COVID-19 and take routinely recommended precautions to limit community spread after traveling from one location to another.
Travelers with greater potential risk of exposure because of the circumstances of their travel (e.g travel from or to an area that is experiencing a high level of spread based on country, state, or county data) or activities during travel (e.g attendance at a large social gathering or mass gathering) are recommended to take additional precautions during the 14 days after travel (see table below).
This page provides U.S. public health officials with an overview of CDCs recommendations for domestic and international travelers with potential COVID-19 exposure.
CDCs post-travel recommendations for all travelers—both international and domestic—are provided in the table below.
Individuals should additionally follow guidance of the state and local authorities for jurisdiction-specific instructions.
1 For the purpose of this guidance, fever is defined as subjective fever (feeling feverish) or a measured temperature of 100.4oF (38oC) or higher.
Note that fever may be intermittent or may not be present in some people, such as those who are elderly, immunosuppressed, or taking certain medications fever-reducing medications (e.g nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs NSAIDS).
2 Cruise ships subject to the No Sail Order should follow Interim Guidance During the Period of the No Sail Order for disembarking crew.
3 See below for guidance on air crews and here for guidance for other essential workers.
Individuals with confirmed or probable COVID-19 should delay travel until they meet criteria for discontinuing isolation.
Individuals who have been exposed to a person with confirmed COVID-19 should delay travel until 14 days after their last potential exposure.
Health departments may request use of federal public health travel restrictions for individuals with confirmed or probable COVID-19 or with known exposure, if they intend to travel before being cleared to do so by public health authorities, by contacting the CDC quarantine station with jurisdiction for the area where the person is located.
CDC supports domestic COVID-19 control efforts by making contact information for international air passengers available to state and local health departments for the purpose of public health follow-up or contact tracing.
At present, collection of traveler contact information is occurring for passengers from countries subject to entry restrictions under Presidential Proclamation.
Follow-up of travelers may include contacting travelers; providing instructions for what travelers should do if they develop illness compatible with COVID-19; and intermittent check-in during the two weeks after arrival.
Mobile applications or automated text messaging may be useful to provide information to or conduct monitoring of travelers.
Follow-up of travelers is at the discretion of health departments and may be considered by jurisdictions that are implementing containment measures.
Decisions about whether to conduct follow-up and what it would involve could be based on the status of the COVID-19 outbreak in the jurisdiction, status of the COVID-19 outbreak in travelers countries or states of origin, volume of travelers, available resources, competing priorities of public health officials, or other factors, as applicable.
CDC and the Federal Aviation Administration have jointly provided Updated Interim Occupational Health and Safety Guidance for Air Carriers and Crews pdf icon7 pagesexternal icon.
This FAA-CDC guidance includes recommendations for air crews to self-monitor under the supervision of their employers occupational health program and to remain in their hotel rooms to the extent possible and practice social distancing while on overnight layovers.
As long as crew members re­­­­­main asymptomatic and have no known exposures to a person with COVID-19, they may continue to work on flights into, within, or departing from the United States.
Crew members who follow their carriers occupational health plan as well as the FAA-CDC guidance are not subject to CDCs recommendation to stay at home for 14 days after travel from an area with high risk of COVID-19.
If they develop fever, cough, shortness of breath, or other symptoms of COVID-19, crew members should self-isolate and be excluded from work on commercial flights until cleared to work by their employers occupational health program following CDCs criteria for Discontinuation of Isolation for Persons with COVID-19 Not in Healthcare Settings.
Crew members who have known exposure to persons with COVID-19 should be excluded from work until 14 days after the last potential exposure.
While air travel is a vital economic activity, CDC does not recommend allowing crew members with known exposures to continue to work, even if asymptomatic, because of the inability of crew members to remove themselves from the workplace if they develop symptoms during a flight and the challenges involved in effectively isolating a symptomatic person on board an aircraft.
The following guidance is provided for definitions and management of contacts of people with COVID-19.
Separate guidance is available for international travelers.
Healthcare personnel (HCP) should follow CDCs Interim U.S.
Guidance for Risk Assessment and Work Restrictions for Healthcare Personnel with Potential Exposure to COVID-19 regarding work restrictions if they have potential exposure to people with COVID-19.
However, such HCP should also follow this Guidance for Community-Related Exposure for what to do in the community.
Individuals should always follow guidance of the state and local authorities.
Public health recommendations have been updated to accommodate new scientific evidence, evolving epidemiology, and the need to simplify risk assessment.
New recommendations are based on:
Current guidance based on community exposure, for people exposed to people with known or suspected COVID-19 or possible COVID-19
Note: This is irrespective of whether the person with COVID-19 or the contact was wearing a mask or whether the contact was wearing respiratory personal protective equipment (PPE)
*For the purpose of this guidance, fever is defined as subjective fever (feeling feverish) or a measured temperature of 100.4°F (38°C) or higher.
Note that fever may be intermittent or may not be present in some people, such as those who are elderly, immunocompromised, or taking certain fever-reducing medications (e.g nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs NSAIDS).
** Data to inform the definition of close contact are limited.
Factors to consider when defining close contact include proximity, the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk), and whether the exposure was to a person with symptoms (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk).
While research indicates masks may help those who are infected from spreading the infection, there is less information regarding whether masks offer any protection for a contact exposed to a symptomatic or asymptomatic patient.
Therefore, the determination of close contact should be made irrespective of whether the person with COVID-19 or the contact was wearing a mask.
Because the general public has not received training on proper selection and use of respiratory PPE, it cannot be certain whether respiratory PPE worn during contact with an individual with COVID-19 infection protected them from exposure.
Therefore, as a conservative approach, the determination of close contact should generally be made irrespective of whether the contact was wearing respiratory PPE, which is recommended for health care personnel and other trained users, or a mask recommended for the general public.
***Data are insufficient to precisely define the duration of time that constitutes a prolonged exposure.
Recommendations vary on the length of time of exposure, but 15 minutes of close exposure can be used as an operational definition.
Brief interactions are less likely to result in transmission; however, symptoms and the type of interaction (e.g did the infected person cough directly into the face of the exposed individual) remain important.
Integration of these definitions and actions into communications and actions of public health authorities can be guided by CDCs Implementation of Mitigation Strategies for Communities with Local COVID-19 Transmissionpdf icon
Interim guidance to reduce the risk of introducing and transmitting SARS COV-2 (the agent responsible for causing COVID-19 disease) in cooling centers.
Who this guidance is for: Federal, state, local, and tribal jurisdictions in the United States considering opening or operating cooling centers during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Purpose: This document provides interim guidance to reduce the risk of introducing and transmitting SARS COV-2 (the agent responsible for causing COVID-19 disease) in cooling centers.
It should be used in conjunction with existing cooling center operation and management plans, procedures, guidance, resources, and systems.
This interim guidance is based on what is currently known about the transmission and severity of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Extreme heat is a major public health concern in the United States.
Exposure to extreme heat can cause a variety of health problems, including heat stroke and death.
Cooling centers (a cool site or air-conditioned facility designed to provide relief and protection during extreme heat) are used by many communities to protect health during heat events.
However, the use of cooling centers can result in congregating of groups of at-risk people, such as older adults or those with respiratory diseases, and potentially provide a route for the transmission of the SARS COV-2 virus and subsequent development of COVID-19 disease among both visitors and staff.
Consider implementing or expanding programs that provide utility assistance, such as the low-income home energy assistance program (LIHEAP) or similar methods that provide financial assistance for home air conditioner use.
A temporary ban on utility shut-offs during heat waves would allow people to continue using home air conditioning.
This strategy could lower the number of people utilizing cooling centers.
Plan for staff and volunteer absences.
Develop flexible attendance and sick-leave policies.
Staff (and volunteers) may need to stay home when they are sick, caring for a sick household member, or caring for their children during school dismissals.
Identify critical job functions and positions, and plan for alternative coverage by cross-training cooling center staff.
If resources are available, consider implementing verbal screening or temperature checks before admitting visitors to the cooling center.
If possible, provide alternative cooling sites for those showing symptoms of COVID-19 (i.e fever, cough, shortness of breath).
This may be separate rooms within cooling centers or a space that can be used to accommodate visitors with symptoms and separate them from others.
Designate an alternate site, or a separate room and bathroom (if available) for visitors with mild illness who remain at the cooling center.
Be prepared to contact emergency officials (call 911) in the case of severe illness requiring medical assistance.
Maintain social (physical) distancing within cooling centers, ideally at least six feet between individuals.
Consider separation of furniture and creating spaces for individual family units (families who live together do not need to maintain physical distancing in a cooling center).
In larger cooling center facilities, it may be possible to provide adequate space for social distancing among visitors.
Smaller cooling centers can limit the number of visitors, in accordance with local guidelines that limit the size of gatherings.
This could lower capacity, so consider setting up a greater number of smaller cooling centers.
If a lack of potential cooling center sites arises, emergency alternatives such as using parked air-conditioned buses can be utilized.
Communities may also partner with closed businesses, such as movie theaters, as alternative cooling sites.
It may not be possible to locate cooling centers in buildings with high ventilation capacity similar to healthcare facilities.
If possible cooling centers should be equipped with air exchange systems, and be located in buildings with tall ceilings.
Utilize the highest efficiency filters that are compatible with the cooling centers existing HVAC system, and adopt clean-to-dirty directional airflows.
If resources allow, ceiling fans with upward airflow rotation combined with upper-air ultraviolet germicidal irradiation (UVGI) disinfection systems can be utilized.
When conditions allow (low humidity), shaded outdoor spaces with cross-draft airflow augmented by evaporative coolers may provide a safer alternative.
Follow the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) cleaning and disinfection guidelines for community facilities, and cleaning facilities if someone is sick.
Because even individuals with no symptoms can still transmit the virus, and the virus can survive for several days on non-porous surfaces, it is important to continue routine cleaning and disinfection (every day if possible) with a focus on high touch surfaces, including those in common areas and bathrooms.
Enhance communication about COVID-19 onsite.
Use health messages and materials developed by credible public health sources, such as your local and state public health departments or CDC.
Read more about everyday preventive actions.
Share or post COVID-19 posters and CDC Fact Sheets and keep your visitors informed about public health recommendations to prevent disease spread.
Messaging may include:
Identify and address potential language, cultural, and disability barriers associated with communicating COVID-19 information to workers, volunteers, and those visiting cooling centers.
Learn more about reaching people of diverse languages and cultures.
If available, provide COVID-19 prevention supplies onsite at cooling centers.
Have supplies on hand for staff, volunteers, and visitors, such as soap, alcohol-based hand sanitizers that contain at least 60% alcohol, tissues, and trash baskets.
Visitors and staff should wear a cloth face covering, or if supplies are available, be given a clean disposable facemaskpdf icon, even if they are not showing any symptoms.
Cloth face coverings should not be placed on young children under age 2, anyone who has trouble breathing, or is unconscious, incapacitated or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Place posters that encourage hand hygiene to help stop the spread at the entrance to the facility, at sinks in restrooms, and in other areas where they are likely to be seen.
If water bottles are distributed at the cooling center, ensure visitors to not share bottles or glasses.
Ensure the safety of your occupants and building water system and devices
The temporary shutdown or reduced operation of a building and reductions in normal water use can create hazards for returning occupants.
Two potential microbial hazards that should be considered prior to reopening after a period of building inactivity are mold and Legionella (the cause of Legionnaires disease).
For mold, a prolonged period may be days, weeks, or months depending upon building-specific factors, season, and weather variables.1 For Legionella, a prolonged period may be weeks or months depending on plumbing-specific factors, disinfectant residuals, water heater temperature set points, water usage patterns, and preexisting Legionella colonization.2 Note that additional hazards, outside of those discussed in this document, may exist for returning occupants.
These can include other microbial hazards, such as non-tuberculous mycobacteria, changes in water chemistry that lead to corrosion, leaching of metals (such as lead) into stagnant water, disinfection by-products, and sewer gases that enter buildings through dry sanitary sewer drain traps.
Mold will grow on building materials where there is moisture, produced from leaks or condensation from roofs, windows, or pipes, or from  a flood.
Mold can grow on a variety of surfaces, such as ceiling tiles, wallpaper, insulation, drywall, carpet, and fabric.
People with asthma and other respiratory conditions and those with mold allergy or weakened immune systems should avoid buildings suspected or confirmed to have mold contamination.
Ensure that your building does not have mold after a prolonged shutdown to maintain a safe working environment for returning occupants.
Content adapted from the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health NIOSH Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning HVAC Cleaning and Remediation guidance.
Stagnant or standing water in a plumbing system can increase the risk for growth and spread of Legionella and other biofilm-associated bacteria.
When water is stagnant, hot water temperatures can decrease to the Legionella growth range (77–108°F, 25–42°C).
Stagnant water can also lead to low or undetectable levels of disinfectant, such as chlorine.
Ensure that your water system is safe to use after a prolonged shutdown to minimize the risk of Legionnaires disease and other diseases associated with water.
People at increased risk of developing Legionnaires disease, such as those with weakened immune systems, should consult with a medical provider regarding participation in flushing, cooling tower cleaning, or other activities that may generate aerosols.
Wearing a half-face air-purifying respirator equipped with an N95 filter, or an N95 filtering facepiece, may be appropriate in enclosed spaces where aerosol generation is likely.
Respirators must be used in accordance with a comprehensive respiratory protection program, which includes fit testing, training, and medical clearance ahead of their use (see OSHA standard 29 CFR 1910.134external icon and OSHA Legionellosis websiteexternal icon).
For more information about N95 respirators, visit the NIOSH National Personal Protective Technology Laboratory (NPPTL) website.
1 For example, a building that is damp and has poor ventilation in a humid region might develop mold growth in a few days that will proliferate unless these conditions change.
In contrast, a building that is dry and well-ventilated in a arid climate might not develop significant mold growth for weeks, months, or at all.
2 For example, a building potable water system with extensive dead-legs, low disinfectant residuals, tepid hot water temperatures, minimal water flow, and an established Legionella biofilm might promote substantial Legionella growth and dissemination in weeks or months.
In contrast, a building with an efficiently designed potable water system that maintains high disinfectant residuals, elevated hot water temperatures, regular water flow, and has no preexisting Legionella population may not support Legionella colonization at all.
CDC has developed a laboratory test to help estimate how many people in the United States have been infected with SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.
Clinicians and researchers refer to this as a serology test, and many commercial laboratories call it an antibody test.
CDC is using this serologic (antibody) test to evaluate the performance of commercial antibody tests.
CDC will develop guidance for the use of antibody tests in clinical and public health settings.
An antibody test looks for the presence of antibodies, which are specific proteins made in response to infections.
Antibodies are detected in the blood of people who are tested after infection; they show an immune response to the infection.
Antibody test results are especially important for detecting previous infections in people who had few or no symptoms.
We do not know if the antibodies that result from SARS-CoV-2 infection will provide someone with protection (immunity) from getting infected again.
If antibodies do provide immunity, we dont know how much antibody is protective or how long protection might last.
CDC scientists are currently conducting studies to answer these questions.
CDCs serologic test has been designed and validated for surveillance and research purposes.
It is designed to estimate the percentage of the U.S. population previously infected with the virus – information needed to guide the response to the pandemic and protect the publics health.
The CDC test is not currently designed to test individuals who want to know if they have been previously infected with SARS-CoV-2.
Commercial tests are available to provide test results to individuals.
Commercially manufactured antibody tests check for SARS-CoV-2 antibodies in individuals and are available through healthcare providers and commercial laboratories.
CDC is evaluating the performance of these tests in collaboration with the following federal organizations:
Results from the initial federal evaluation are included in FDAs EUA Authorized Serology Test Performanceexternal icon and will be updated as more tests are evaluated.
Read CDCs interim guidelines for using antibody tests in clinical and public health settings.
CDCs serologic test is an ELISA-based testexternal icon to detect SARS-CoV-2 antibodies in serum or plasma components of blood.
It uses purified SARS-CoV-2 S protein (no live virus) as antigen (designed by the Vaccine Research Centerexternal icon at the National Institutes of Health).
CDCs serologic test is designed to detect antibodies produced in response to SARS-CoV-2 and minimize cross-reactivity to antibodies generated to other common coronaviruses that cause less severe illnesses, such as colds.
However, potential cross-reactivity cannot be completely ruled out.
CDCs serologic test has a specificity of greater than 99% and a sensitivity of 96% based on initial performance evaluations.
It can be used to identify past SARS-CoV-2 infection in people who were infected at least 1 to 3 weeks previously.
CDC has a strategy for using antibody testing as part of surveillance efforts to better understand how much of the U.S. population has been infected with SARS-CoV-2 and how the virus is spreading through the population over time.
Learn more about CDCs COVID-19 serology surveillance strategy.
Interim Guidelines for Collecting, Handling, and Testing Clinical Specimens from Persons for Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)
Revisions were made on May 22, 2020 to reflect the following:
Revisions were made on May 5, 2020 to reflect the following:
Revisions were made on April 29, 2020 to reflect the following: 
Revisions were made on April 14, 2020 to reflect the following:
Healthcare providers* considering testing people with possible COVID-19 should work with their local and state health departments to coordinate testing through public health laboratories, or work with commercial or clinical laboratories using viral tests granted an Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
CDC has guidance for who should be tested, but decisions about who should be tested are at the discretion of state and local health departments and/or healthcare providers.
Testing for other pathogens by the provider should be done as part of the initial evaluation, as indicated, but should not delay testing for SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.
Positive SARS-CoV-2 results should be reported.
Read CDCs Data and Reporting FAQ for Laboratories.
Clinical laboratories should NOT attempt viral isolation from specimens collected from people suspected to have COVID-19 unless this is performed in a BSL-3 laboratory.
*Pharmacists are considered healthcare providers in this guidance.
All testing for SARS-CoV-2 should be conducted in consultation with a healthcare provider.
Specimens should be collected as soon as possible once a decision has been made to pursue testing, regardless of the time of symptom onset.
The guidance below addresses options for collection of specimens.
For initial diagnostic testing for SARS-CoV-2, CDC recommends collecting and testing an upper respiratory specimen.
The following are acceptable specimens:
Swabs should be placed immediately into a sterile transport tube containing 2-3mL of either viral transport medium (VTM), Amies transport medium, or sterile saline, unless using a test designed to analyze a specimen  directly, (i.e without placement in VTM), such as some point-of-care testsexternal icon.
If VTM is not available, see the standard operating procedure for public health labs to create viral transport mediumpdf icon in accordance with CDCs protocol.
The NW specimen and the non-bacteriostatic saline used to collect the specimen should be placed immediately into a sterile transport tube.
Testing lower respiratory tract specimens is also an option.
For patients who develop a productive cough, sputum should be collected and tested for SARS-CoV-2.
The induction of sputum is not recommended.
When under certain clinical circumstances (e.g those receiving invasive mechanical ventilation), a lower respiratory tract aspirate or bronchoalveolar lavage sample should be collected and tested as a lower respiratory tract specimen.
Collecting and Handling Specimens Safely
For providers collecting specimens or within 6 feet of patients suspected to be infected with SARS-CoV-2, maintain proper infection control and use recommended personal protective equipment (PPE), which includes an N95 or higher-level respirator (or facemask if a respirator is not available), eye protection, gloves, and a gown, when collecting specimens.
For providers who are handling specimens, but are not directly involved in collection (e.g.
self-collection) and not working within 6 feet of the patient, follow Standard Precautions.
Healthcare personnel are recommended to wear a form of source control (facemask or cloth face covering) at all times while in the healthcare facility.
PPE use can be minimized through patient self-collection while the healthcare provider maintains at least 6 feet of separation.
Handling Bulk-Packaged Sterile Swabs Properly for Upper Respiratory Sample Collection 
Sterile swabs for upper respiratory specimen collection may be packaged in one of two ways:
Bulk-packaged swabs may be used for sample collection; however, care must be exercised to avoid SARS-CoV-2 contamination of any of the swabs in the bulk-packaged container.
Proper collection of specimens is the most important step in the laboratory diagnosis of infectious diseases.
A specimen that is not collected correctly may lead to false negative test results.
The following specimen collection guidelines follow standard recommended procedures.
For more information, including illustrations and step-by-step guidance, see the CDC Influenza Specimen Collectionpdf icon instructions.
Note that these instructions are applicable for respiratory viruses in general, and not specific for only influenza virus.
Use only synthetic fiber swabs with plastic or wire shafts.
Do not use calcium alginate swabs or swabs with wooden shafts, as they may contain substances that inactivate some viruses and inhibit PCR testing.
CDC is now recommending collecting only the NP swab, although OP swabs remain an acceptable specimen type.
If both NP and OP swabs are collected, they should be combined in a single tube to maximize test sensitivity and limit use of testing resources.
NP swab: Insert minitip swab with a flexible shaft (wire or plastic) through the nostril parallel to the palate (not upwards) until resistance is encountered or the distance is equivalent to that from the ear to the nostril of the patient, indicating contact with the nasopharynx.
Swab should reach depth equal to distance from nostrils to outer opening of the ear.
Gently rub and roll the swab.
Leave swab in place for several seconds to absorb secretions.
Slowly remove swab while rotating it.
Specimens can be collected from both sides using the same swab, but it is not necessary to collect specimens from both sides if the minitip is saturated with fluid from the first collection.
If a deviated septum or blockage create difficulty in obtaining the specimen from one nostril, use the same swab to obtain the specimen from the other nostril.
OP swab: Insert swab into the posterior pharynx and tonsillar areas.
Rub swab over both tonsillar pillars and posterior oropharynx and avoid touching the tongue, teeth, and gums.
Nasal mid-turbinate (NMT) swab, also called Deep Nasal Swab
Use a flocked tapered swab.
Tilt patients head back 70 degrees.
While gently rotating the swab, insert swab less than one inch (about 2 cm) into nostril (until resistance is met at turbinates).
Rotate the swab several times against nasal wall and repeat in other nostril using the same swab.
Using a flocked or spun polyester swab, insert the swab at least 1 cm (0.5 inch) inside the nostril (naris) and firmly sample the nasal membrane by rotating the swab and leaving in place for 10 to 15 seconds.
Sample both nostrils with same swab.
Nasopharyngeal wash/aspirate or nasal wash/aspirate 
Attach catheter to suction apparatus.
Have the patient sit with head tilted slightly backward.
Instill 1 mL-1.5 mL of non-bacteriostatic saline (pH 7.0) into one nostril.
Insert the tubing into the nostril parallel to the palate (not upwards).
Catheter should reach depth equal to distance from nostrils to outer opening of ear.
Begin gentle suction/aspiration and remove catheter while rotating it gently.
Place specimen in a sterile viral transport media tube.
Bronchoalveolar lavage, tracheal aspirate, pleural fluid, lung biopsy
Collect 2-3 mL into a sterile, leak-proof, screw-cap sputum collection cup or sterile dry container.
Due to the increased technical skill and equipment needs, collection of specimens other than sputum from the lower respiratory tract may be limited to patients presenting with more severe disease, including people admitted to the hospital and/or fatal cases.
Educate the patient about the difference between sputum and oral secretions (saliva).
Have the patient rinse the mouth with water and then expectorate deep cough sputum directly into a sterile, leak-proof, screw-cap collection cup or sterile dry container.
Store specimens at 2-8°C for up to 72 hours after collection.
If a delay in testing or shipping is expected, store specimens at -70°C or below.
Samples may be shipped to CDC if repeated testing results remain inconclusive or if other unusual results are obtained.
Please contact CDC at respvirus@cdc.gov prior to submitting samples.
If shipping samples to CDC: If specimens will ship without delay, store specimens at 2-8°C, and ship overnight to CDC on ice pack.
If a delay in shipping will result in receipt at CDC more than 72 hours after collection, store specimens at -70°C or below and ship overnight to CDC on dry ice.
Additional useful and detailed information on packing, shipping, and transporting specimens can be found at Interim Laboratory Biosafety Guidelines for Handling and Processing Specimens Associated with Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Specimens must be packaged, shipped, and transported according to the current edition of the International Air Transport Association (IATA) Dangerous Goods Regulations external iconexternal icon.
Label each specimen container with the patients ID number (e.g medical record number), unique CDC or state-generated nCov specimen ID (e.g laboratory requisition number), specimen type (e.g serum) and the date the sample was collected.
Complete a CDC Form 50.34 for each specimen submitted.
In the upper left box of the form, 1) for test requested select Respiratory virus molecular detection (non-influenza) CDC-10401 and 2) for At CDC, bring to the attention of enter Unit 84 (Non-flu Resp Virus).
Please refer to our instruction guidance for submitting CDC Form 50.34 found here: Guidelines For Submitting Specimens to CDCpdf icon.
For additional information, consultation, or the CDC shipping address, contact the CDC Emergency Operations Center (EOC) at 770-488-7100.
Revisions made on August 7, 2020 include:
Revisions made on July 16, 2020 include:
Revisions made on July 13, 2020 to update:
Revisions made on June 3, 2020 include:
Revisions made on May 11, 2020 include recommendations for:
Until more information becomes available, precautions should be taken in handling specimens that are suspected or confirmed for SARS-CoV-2.
Timely communication between clinical and laboratory staff is essential to minimize the risk incurred in handling specimens from patients with possible SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Such specimens should be labeled accordingly, and the laboratory should be alerted to ensure proper specimen handling.
General and specific biosafety guidelines for handling SARS-CoV-2 specimens are provided below.
For additional information on handling SARS-CoV-2 specimens, refer to the Laboratory Frequently Asked Questions.
All laboratories should perform a site-specific and activity-specific risk assessment to identify and mitigate risks.
Risk assessments and mitigation measures are dependent on:
Follow Standard Precautions when handling clinical specimens, all of which may contain potentially infectious materials.
Follow routine laboratory practices and procedures for decontamination of work surfaces and management of laboratory waste.
Routine diagnostic testing of specimens, such as the following activities, can be handled in a BSL-2 laboratory using Standard Precautions:
The practice of anatomic pathology plays a critical role in determining accurate disease diagnoses by studying organ tissues and fluids.
Anatomic pathology includes surgical pathology, histotechnology, cytology, and autopsy.
Risks associated with surgical pathology and some cytology procedures occur during the manipulation of fresh tissue and body fluids from patients who may have an unknown or known infectious disease, such as COVID-19.
Risks are increased in the surgical grossing room during manual specimen handling, tissue dissection, and the preparation of frozen sections of tissue using a cryostat.
These procedures can result in percutaneous exposures from punctures or cuts; droplet or aerosol exposures from splashes of blood and body fluids; and exposures from surfaces contaminated with the virus.
Clinical as well as non-clinical support staff need to be aware of these risks and provided with effective mitigation procedures.
See Laboratory Frequently Asked Questions for more information.
For information on autopsies, see Collection and Submission of Postmortem Specimens from Deceased Persons with Known or Suspected COVID-19
Note: This guidance does not apply to clinical pathology, which involves laboratory testing on patient specimens, such as blood, body fluids, stool and urine.
Clinical pathology uses different procedures and workflows than those used in anatomic pathology, and therefore the risks and mitigation controls needed to protect personnel are different.
At a minimum, all personnel—whether practicing anatomic or clinical pathology—should follow Standard Precautions when handling patient tissues and specimens.
Point-of-Care (POC) tests are intended to supplement laboratory testing, making testing available to communities and populations that cannot readily access laboratory testing, and bolstering testing to quickly address emerging outbreaks.
Examples of potential uses for POC instruments for COVID-19 diagnostic purposes include:
Regulatory requirements and necessary CLIA documentation need to be considered when deploying instruments to these settings if they are not currently performing other POC testing.
Testing sites that operate a POC diagnostic instrument must have a current Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments of 1988 (CLIA) certificate.
During the COVID-19 public health emergency, the Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services (CMS) will permit a laboratory to extend its existing Certificate of Waiver to operate a temporary COVID-19 testing site in an off-site location, such as a long-term care facility.
The temporary COVID-19 testing site is only permitted to perform waived tests, consistent with the laboratorys existing certificate, and must be under the direction of the existing lab director.
Laboratories should consider the following when using POC instruments for SARS-CoV-2 diagnostic purpose:
Procedures with a high likelihood of generating aerosols or droplets, should be done using either a certified Class II Biological Safety Cabinet (BSC) or additional precautions to provide a barrier between the specimen and personnel.
Examples of these additional precautions include personal protective equipment (PPE), such as a surgical mask or face shield, or other physical barriers, like a splash shield; centrifuge safety cups; and sealed centrifuge rotors to reduce the risk of exposure to laboratory personnel.
Site- and activity-specific biosafety risk assessments should be performed to determine if additional biosafety precautions are warranted based on situational needs, such as high testing volumes, and the likelihood to generate infectious droplets and aerosols.
Procedures that concentrate viruses, such as precipitation or membrane filtration, can be performed in a BSL-2 laboratory with unidirectional airflow and BSL-3 precautions, including respiratory protection and a designated area for donning and doffing PPE.
The donning and doffing space should not be in the workspace.
Work should be performed in a certified Class II BSC.
This guidance is intended for only those laboratories that perform virus concentration procedures, including wastewater/sewage surveillance testing, and not for public health or clinical diagnostic laboratories that handle COVID-19 clinical specimens or laboratories that perform culture and isolation of SARS-CoV-2.
Site- and activity-specific biosafety risk assessments should be performed to determine if additional biosafety precautions are warranted based on situational needs, such as high testing volumes or large volumes, and the likelihood to generate infectious droplets and aerosols.
CDC recommends virus isolation in cell culture, and initial characterization of viral agents recovered in cultures of novel SARS-CoV-2 should be conducted in a Biosafety Level 3 (BSL-3) laboratory using BSL-3 practices.
To determine appropriate biosafety mitigation measures, laboratories should perform an activity-specific biosafety risk assessment that evaluates laboratory facilities, personnel and training, practices and techniques, safety equipment, and risk mitigation measures.
Biosafety professionals, laboratory management, and scientific and safety experts should be involved in the risk assessment process.
For more information on risk assessments:
SARS-CoV-2 Viral Culturing at CDC
Decontaminate work surfaces and equipment with appropriate disinfectants by using an EPA-approved disinfectant for SARS-CoV-2external icon.
Following the manufacturers recommendations for use, such as dilution, contact time, and safe handling.
Handle laboratory waste from testing suspected or confirmed COVID-19 patient specimens as all other biohazardous waste in the laboratory.
Currently, there is no evidence to suggest that this laboratory waste needs any additional packaging or disinfection procedures
Pack and ship suspected and confirmed SARS-CoV-2 patient specimens, cultures, or isolates as UN 3373 Biological Substance, Category B, in accordance with the current edition of the International Air Transport Association (IATA) Dangerous Goods Regulationsexternal icon and U.S. Department of Transportations (DOT) Transporting Infectious Substances Safelypdf iconexternal icon.
Personnel must be trained to pack and ship according to the regulations and in a manner that corresponds to their function-specific responsibilities.
